Lately, I have been working with numerous design teams exploring virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and mixed reality (MR). Regardless of design experience, most teams had an interesting story: Note, my thoughts below do not represent the views of my company. They would start with their previous design process, whether it was from making software or games; however, after they created the design documents, mocked up the wireframes, and began implementing, nothing worked because VR/AR/MR were just too new for anyone to understand what designs would or would not work. After this point, most teams concluded, 'Let's just start prototyping in code as soon as possible and iterate from there.' Many teams would even point to the 'Build-Measure-Learn' cycle from The Lean Startup Methodology to try to justify why it was great that their design process was getting shorter and shorter, yet the time it took them to actually create a compelling product took longer and longer. In some ways, teams were missing the point. By skipping the early phases of design with the reason, 'Well, we do not know if it will work until we test it on the hardware anyways,' design teams are now skipping an entire 'Build-Measure-Learn' cycle that can happen in just the paper design phase of product development. Product Designer Julie Zhuo once drew these images to describe the difference between a Junior Designer and a Senior Designer: By jumping straight into prototyping in code, teams are behaving like a Junior Designer would, often asking engineering teams to chase leads as they emerge until they hopefully arrive at a solution. To get around this issue, my design teams have been following a few simple tips to ensure that we are always learning how to design for VR/AR/MR and over time, have cut down the iteration time needed to create a compelling product: Hopefully, these steps empower your design team to cut down the iteration time needed to create compelling products in VR/AR/MR. This is an exciting time for designers, and everyone is fighting to be the team that creates the next medium-defining experience; however, just because it is unexplored space does not mean we have to throw away everything we have learned about how we do design. Jeffrey Lin, Ph.D. Dr. Jeffrey Lin was a Lead Product Owner and Lead Designer of the award-winning PC game League of Legends at Riot Games, one of Fortune's Best Companies to Work For. He was also a Research Scientist at Valve Software, makers of the award-winning PC game Portal 2, and creators of the Steam platform. He obtained his PhD in Cognitive Neuroscience from the University of Washington where he was funded by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. His design work has been featured in Wired Magazine, MIT Tech Review, The Verge, Scientific American, Times Health & Science, and Re/code. His research has been featured in numerous peer reviewed journals, including Nature.
