I am a big fan of How It's Made ' the documentary television series that aired on Discovery Channel. It's not just because I am curious to know how things are created, but also because I love watching robots work on the assembly line in a precise manner. Robots have entered almost every aspect of the manufacturing process, improving its speed, consistency, and precision. They performs tasks that are dangerous or monotonous for humans. Now, even logistics and warehousing are being automated using robots. Gurgaon-based hardware startup Grey Orange is one of the companies on that frontier. The startup initially launched in 2009 as an education and training company in the robotics space. Later on, it evolved into an industrial robot manufacturing company. Grey Orange builds robots that operate in the warehouses of retail, logistics, and ecommerce companies with the goal of enabling quicker deliveries and minimal errors. Faster turnarounds and few errors go a long way in helping these companies. The company was founded by Samay Kohli and Akash Gupta due to their mutual love for robotics. Kohli is a mechanical engineering graduate from Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) Pilani. He was the founder and team leader of a humanoid program called AcYut at the Center for Robotics and Intelligent Systems at BITS Pilani. The program builds a series of humanoid robots called AcYut, one of the first developed indigenously. Gupta, who studied mechanical engineering there, also joined the group. The group represented India at various robotics competitions across the world, winning a gold medal at the RoboGames 2010 held in San Mateo, California. At present, Grey Orange has three types of products to offer. 'All the three products have been created with the idea of reducing human intervention and resultant error in the entire process of order fulfillment,' says Kohli. Its three main robots are: the profiler, sorter, and butler. The profiler is a high-speed dynamic dimension and weighing system. It captures the real volume, box volume, dimensions, and weight of parcels. Sorter is a high-speed sortating system for package profiling and routing. It's a mechanical system which segregates items based on a pre-defined logic. Commonly used by logistics and ecommerce companies, it can sort at average speeds of 3,600 packets and 7,200 packets per hour. It can also be integrated with a profiler. Butler, meanwhile, is a storage and retrieval robot. It's based on a new methodology called 'goods-to-man', which aims to minimize walking and searching by workers. Butlers move around warehouses like intelligent forklifts, carrying shelves stacked with various products to a floor assistant. He then scans the barcode to confirm the right items. 'Butlers help a worker pick 500 items per hour, as compared to the frequency of 40 to 80 items per hour per person by the existing manual process,' claims Kohli. Grey Orange is currently working closely with companies such as Delhivery, DTDC, Flipkart, Aramax, and Kerry Logistics. The warehousing and logistics industry in India has always relied on manual handling of its operations. The low labor cost in the country could be one of the key reasons behind this. The industry's low rate of adoption of automation solutions has been a major concern for Grey Orange. However, the industry is evolving and has started accepting automation; so much so that the startup recently had to scale-up within a short span of time to meet the demand and ensure customer satisfaction. Diwali is the one of the most celebrated festivals of India. This is the time when the ecommerce companies dole out lucrative offers and discounts to cash-in on the shopping fervor that grips the nation. The courier and logistics companies also have their hands full during this time. This Diwali, Grey Orange is working with many big names in the ecommerce and logistics sector to help them gear up for the festive season. With this sudden increase in demand, the company recently realized that its current set up would not be able to handle this increased demand. It had to scale-up its backend operations to offer customer support and the annual maintenance servicing that it promises to offer its clients. 'We have now started regional offices across India for product maintenance and support. Support offices have also been set up in Bangalore, Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, and Hyderabad to help our customers handle their loads. This would have been a major roadblock if our operations team couldn't scale up immediately,' says Kohli. Grey Orange focuses and invests heavily on R&D. Kohli says this is because the company believes in building its own hardware and software for its products. 'Our customers love the fact that we provide end-to-end solutions, and that is possible because we can control every piece of code and every micro-controller that runs the same.' Its R&D team comprises of people from various walks of engineering ' software, mechanical, electrical & electronics, firmware, and UI/UX design & development. Contrary to the popular belief, it doesn't only hire people who have experience in robotics. It hires experts in any of above mentioned disciplines. 80 percent of its team members are alumni of Birla Institute of Technology and Science and IITs. Last year, the company set up its new office in Gurgaon. Its design project was called 'Project Taj Mahal'. 'It has dedicated labs and prototyping areas with our own machines and tools for designing our bots. The office also has a rough warehouse feel to it; to keep the design aligned with the industry our products cater to,' says Kohli. The company raised its seed funding of half a million dollars from Blume Ventures and Bitspark Angels back in 2012. Thereafter, it raised an undisclosed amount in a series A round from Tiger Global and Blume Ventures in 2014 Grey Orange is currently planning on international expansion. Markets like Japan and China are interested in Butler, while Sorter has sparked interest in China and Southeast Asia. The startup has identified strategic partners in these as well as other markets. Internationally, Grey Orange competes with Swisslog, Kiva Systems, and Fetch Robotics. Switzerland-based Swisslog is a global provider of warehouse robots, distribution centers, and hospitals. Based in Massachusetts, USA, Kiva Systems manufactures mobile robotics fulfillment centers. It was founded by Mick Mountz, Peter Wurman, and Raffaello D'Andrea. It was acquired by Amazon in 2012 for a whopping US$775 million. It currently operates as a subsidiary company of Amazon. San Jose, California-based Fetch Robotics was founded in 2014 and raised US$3 million in a series A round from O'Reilly AlphaTech Ventures (OATV) and Shasta Ventures in February 2015. Last month, it raised US$20 million in another round led by SoftBank and existing investors. Back home, there are players like Robots Alive, Hi-tech Robotic Systemz, and Robosoft Systems that focus on automation. Hi-tech Robotic Systemz does warehouse robotics. It also builds automated guided vehicles (AGVs) and is into defense robotics as well. Mumbai-based Robosoft Systems manufactures duct cleaning and inspection robots. It has now diversified into robotics education. Stay a step ahead with the upcoming Tech in Asia Premium. Committed to producing deeply reported content on tech and startups in Asia, we will be moving into a paid subscription model in the near future. This will allow us to continue investing in creating content of value for you. Secure an early bird rate today when you pre-register.
