Ken Brook has worked in advertising technology for years, so he knows what advertisers have to deal with on the Internet: Digital advertising is plagued with fraud, from phantom ads that no one ever sees to adware that infects people's computers. Brook's new self-funded Los Angeles startup, MetaX, aims to solve that problem using blockchain, the technology most popularly used for the cryptocurrency bitcoin. MetaX today is unveiling adChain, which it says is the first protocol using the distributed ledger technology to coordinate the digital ad supply chain. Fraud and the lack of transparency that enables it are big problems in display advertising, with marketers considering pulling budgets out of online advertising and governments from France to the United States mulling restrictions on digital ad practices. Brook, an ad tech serial entrepreneur who is still CEO of video ad tech firm VidRoll LLC, says adChain could provide a lot of benefits to the fragmented digital ad business, but fraud is the first target. "Fraud prevention is a natural first application," he said, not least because the display ad ecosystem remains murky, with advertisers often unsure where or even if their ads ran, especially outside the walled gardens of Google Inc. and Facebook Inc., generally regarded as more trustworthy than the dozens of ad networks and other middlemen in display ads. AdChain provides a blockchain, or database, that is shared among parties in an ad campaign, storing data such as impressions and audience segments. A brand or retailer buys ad impressions through a real-time buying platform that finds target audiences in ad exchanges that provide access to online publishers' inventory. The impressions are encrypted and broadcast to each participant in the blockchain, who approve the impression. The block becomes part of the permanent ledger and the impressions are verified. The adChain protocol is now in production in a private beta test with a few companies, which Brook won't name. MetaX plans to make it not-for-profit to encourage more use. MetaX provides a dashboard to access adChain and is building applications on top of it, such as a blockchain bidder with what it says is better targeting and security. It plans to make money from subscriptions to those applications. None of this will be easy for MetaX. For one, it essentially needs to get pretty much the entire display advertising industry to go along, a tough road for a little startup that didn't exist before last November. Some marketers appear willing to give it a try. Fred Askham, associate director of data analytics and decision sciences at the ad agency IMM, said his clients will appreciate the transparency. For his part, he looks forward to better data for targeting ads and gauging their impact.