Minerva Technologies has announced MINERVA (OWL), a platform and currency which provides an additional revenue stream to the businesses that accept it. This additional revenue stream is created by introducing “reverse transaction fees,” wherein approved merchants are rewarded new OWL tokens at a variable rate with each transaction. Currently, many businesses struggle with accepting digital currencies. Minerva addresses these adoption issues by introducing incentivized payment solutions and the “Minerva Volatility Protocol.” By using these tools, the Minerva team seeks to accelerate the mainstream adoption of digital currency and smart contract Blockchain technologies. Minerva has been compared to Ticketmaster in that they disrupted their niche market by paying ticket sellers rather than charging them fees. However, Minerva does not seek to disrupt a niche market, but rather disrupt commerce itself through the introduction of reverse transaction fees. Minerva has partnered with a live-streaming service with $20 million in yearly revenue and over 10 million users to act as an immediate first use case. The purpose of this partnership is to show the before-and-after revenue impact of a business accepting the Minerva OWL token as a method of payment. Minerva’s goal is to recruit various merchant processing services and prominent commerce platforms into the Minerva Smart Money Alliance (MSMA). The Minerva Smart Money Alliance (MSMA) is a proposed consortium of organizations that either accept the OWL token as payment or are strategically partnered with Minerva Technologies S.a.r.l., a Luxembourg-based Blockchain software company and parent entity to the Minerva platform. They plan to work with various groups and individuals to optimize the secure storage and transmission of sensitive data. Though concerted time and effort will be needed, the Minerva team feels that it is a realistic expectation that Minerva and its OWL token will become one of the most enterprise-friendly platforms and currencies available. Those interested can read the whitepaper and sign up to their newsletter at the official Minerva website. Founder of industry publication Blockchain News, partner at ICO services collective CryptoAsset Design Group (helped raise over $200m+), director of education company Blockchain Partners (Oracle Partner) and ICO event organiser at leading industry event CryptoFinancing (first ICO event in Europe) - Richard Kastelein is an award-winning publisher, innovation executive and entrepreneur. He sits on the advisory boards of half a dozen Blockchain startups and has written over 1200 articles on Blockchain technology and startups at Blockchain News and has also published pioneering articles on ICOs in Harvard Business Review and Venturebeat. Kastelein has spoken (keynotes & panels) on Blockchain technology in Amsterdam, Antwerp, Barcelona, Beijing, Brussels, Bucharest, Dubai, Eindhoven, Gdansk, Groningen, the Hague, Helsinki, London, Manchester, Minsk, Nairobi, Nanchang, San Mateo, Shanghai,Tel Aviv and Venice. His network is global and extensive. He is a Canadian (Dutch/Irish/English/Métis) whose writing career has ranged from the Canadian Native Press (Arctic) to the Caribbean & Europe. He's written occasionally for Harvard Business Review, Wired, Venturebeat, The Guardian and Virgin.com and his work and ideas have been translated into Dutch, Greek, Polish, German and French. A journalist by trade, an entrepreneur and adventurer at heart, Kastelein's professional career has ranged from political publishing to TV technology, boatbuilding to judging startups, skippering yachts to marketing and more as he's travelled for nearly 30 years as a Canadian expatriate living around the world. In his 20s, he sailed around the world on small yachts and wrote a series of travel articles called, "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Seas' travelling by hitching rides on yachts (1989) in major travel and yachting publications. He currently lives in Groningen, Netherlands where he's raising three teenage daughters with his wife and sailing partner, Wieke Beenen.