In Brief Computing is about to get a whole lot better. Nvidia has officially released a powerful PC GPU that is said to have nine times the deep-learning capabilities of previous models, and it's available for a public, consumer market.Powerful PC GPUNvidia, the company that created the most energy efficient supercomputer of all time, a compact artificially intelligent (AI) computer capable of driving autonomous vehicles, and advanced eye-tracking technology, has taken another giant leap forward. It just released “the most powerful PC GPU ever created,” in their own words — a machine called “Titan V” which can be used to run AI and scientific simulation processing.It’s also the first consumer-grade GPU (graphics processing unit) that the company has created around its Volta framework, which aims to incorporate AI into all developing designs while supporting and fueling moonshot concepts involving AI.While this gold and black computational marvel is a “consumer-grade product,” it also costs $2,999. But, according to Nvidia, the GPU has top-of-the-line memory and performance that equip it with nine times the deep-learning capabilities of Nvidia’s previous model. So, while it is unattainably expensive for many, it really delivers.AI for AllNvidia founder and CEO Jensen Huang said in a statement, “Our vision for Volta was to push the outer limits of high performance computing and AI. We broke new ground with its new processor architecture, instructions, numerical formats, memory architecture, and processor links. With Titan V, we are putting Volta into the hands of researchers and scientists all over the world. I can’t wait to see their breakthrough discoveries.”It’s possible that there will be future Volta-based models that will be more accessibly-priced and specifically designed for gamers. As of now, there are no official announcements on that possibility. But it’s likely that there would be a market for such tech based on the success of Nvidia’s current Pascal architecture and GTX 1080 — one of the best GPU options for gaming.Computers are advancing at lightning-speed. From quantum computing developments to legendary processing power, there seem to truly be no limits. The Titan V and other Volta-linked products are a testament to this, as they are pushing the incorporation of AI into all other technologies — a prospect that could truly transform our world.