From ransomware and Trojans to faceless hackers and “two-faced” malware, the malicious nature of cyber threats continues to evolve at the same pace as breakthroughs in cybersecurity. Today, hackers have the means to pull off highly sophisticated cyber attacks that can take down businesses, take governments hostage, or even take down a huge swath of the web with one single attack! This rapidly evolving data security landscape has pushed governments (and businesses) into a virtual arms race, prompting hackers to do research and development on more efficient cyber security technologies. And it seems that all their efforts have finally paid off. Scientists at NASA have developed what could be hailed as the Shield of Aegis of the digital multiverse — a breakthrough technology that, quite surprisingly, comes from the realm of Quantum Physics. According to a recently published research paper by Nature Photonics, scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab have successfully set up the first ultra-secure hack-proof “Quantum Internet.” But can the internet really be “hack-proof?” When we look at traditional encryption, the strength of a key is measured by the number of digital bits it uses. To a novice hacker, the 256-bit encryption which is commonly used today would take a ridiculously long time to crack. “But not all hackers are noobs,” argues Eduard Yegor, data security expert and manager of global marketing for Russia-based Ivacy VPN. “Although many people tend to ignore it, the risk is very much real, even in the virtual space of the internet,” he adds. “Brute force decryption techniques, for example, have played an important role in rendering current encryption methods highly susceptible to interception.” At the other end of this digital spectrum is the concept of Quantum Internet, which uses cryptography that is based on the intrinsically random nature of quantum mechanics. By generating a digital key based on a random set of numbers, quantum internet ensures that the key is practically impossible to crack. Scientists at NASA achieved this breakthrough by firing a photon laser through a metropolitan fiber cable network that causes the photons in the laser to entangle. While the phenomenon has been routinely simulated in lab settings, this is the first time that the experiment was successfully executed over a long distance of 6 kilometers, within an actual city (Calgary). When asked to comment on NASA’s recent breakthrough in the field of quantum key encryption, Kevin Curran, senior member of the IEEE and senior lecturer in computer science at Ulster University, had this to say: “Quantum encryption is the holy grail of truly secure communications. It is considered secure as any attempt to eavesdrop on the communication link can be determined. The information can quite simply not be copied either as quantum physics forbids the cloning of an unknown quantum state. This offers an information-theoretically secure solution to the key exchange problem which will render many public-key algorithms obsolete.” The concept of the cryptography used by quantum internet is very similar to that of the “cryptex” which was recently introduced to the world in Dan Brown’s best-selling novel, Da Vinci Code. The cryptex, which is used to send secret messages, can be opened only by the sender or the recipient, both of whom know the secret lock-combination. If anyone else tries to open the cryptex, the message contained within it self-destructs. Quantum mechanics works the same way, allowing two parties to generate and secretly share a random key which is known only to them. This unique key allows both parties to convert and decipher messages that are transmitted through a fiber cable network in the form of photons. The photons are entangled which means that if a hacker tries to manipulate even one of them, the others will instantly mimic its trajectory, setting off a chain reaction. So if anyone attempts to hack the message, all the photons will self-destruct, reaching the recipient as unintelligible information. The implications of this breakthrough are tremendous, particularly in the realm of data security. While this is a quantum leap in technology, it is an emerging field and may take years to retrofit into existing systems. Nevertheless, Quantum Internet seems to be a godsend in these precarious landscapes of the virtual world and the multifaceted threats that loom within. Quantum key distribution has tremendous potential and could herald a whole new world of possibilities, promising foolproof data security, privacy, and confidentiality for government, corporate, and personal use. So, although there is still a long way to go until the technology makes its way to fiber-optic networks and free space satellite communications, NASA’s breakthrough in quantum mechanics simply cannot be disregarded as a small step. It is a giant leap for mankind and the key to creating a truly hack-proof global quantum network.