Cybersecurity as a field has expanded tremendously over the past few years, in many ways mirroring the proliferation of the internet. Increased connectivity and the networked nature of society also mean that computers and connected devices can be used for powerful attacks that could cripple entire systems. Disclosure: The author of this post is not affiliated with any of the organizations mentioned in the article below. Up until now, there have only been a few real solutions to this problem, and the fact remains that a single computer or system is not powerful enough to defend against an entire networked attack. But now, blockchain-based technologies promise to make these attacks—known as distributed denial of service (DDoS)—a relic of the past. With a decentralized structure and mesh architecture, attacking a single node on a blockchain cannot cripple the whole system. Some companies have already conceived defense systems that harness this security strategy. One notable pioneer in the field is blockchain startup Gladius, which is looking to revolutionize cybersecurity by inventing a shared resources paradigm where everyone can participate to safeguard others. The common thinking is that having more people involved means less security. However, according to Gladius co-founder and CEO Max Niebylski, the company uses numbers to its advantage. “Using the blockchain to create a network of trust enables us to spread sensitive and vital information across the globe while remaining fully encrypted,” said Niebylski in a press release. “Using the blockchain to create a network of trust enables us to spread sensitive and vital information across the globe while remaining fully encrypted,” said Niebylski in a press release. At its core, blockchain is a decentralized network architecture that uses a series of nodes to update information to all points simultaneously. The strength of the system is that data is not held in an individual location like a traditional database. As a result, every user on the chain has all the information about the chain at the same time. DDoS attacks are based on overloading a single database with information, causing it to subsequently crash. Attacks of this kind are becoming more sophisticated and automated. Blockchain’s mesh architecture prevents DDoS because even if hackers can overpower one node, all the information on the network is also contained on every other node. Organizing an attack on every single node in a chain simultaneously is not impossible, but it is highly improbable. More importantly, even if one or several nodes are taken offline, others can still carry on operating without downtime. A blockchain’s nodes are made up of individuals who are transacting on the particular chain. In some cases, these users can earn some reward—as is the case for blockchain miners who crack hashes to continue building the chain. But in most cases, users are simply giving up spare bandwidth and processing space. Gladius proposes to use this spare bandwidth and processing power. It lets users monetize their time on the blockchain by forming pools of nodes that accelerate web traffic and mitigate the risk of DDoS attacks. In addition, the company enables websites to find those pools that offer better traffic speeds and higher protection in a virtual marketplace, eliminating middlemen like hosting companies and accelerators. Users will then simply transact in the company’s tokens (GLA). The system benefits both individual users, who can monetize the spare processing bandwidth, and websites, which are able to find networks that match their bandwidth and security needs. Looking ahead, however, some challenges remain for the company. While blockchain has proven to be a robust cybersecurity solution, it is largely dependent on the size of the network. For Gladius to truly be a game changer, it requires widespread adoption. This way, enough pools of users will be developed to give their marketplace a boost and ensure websites can access the necessary solutions. There are also other competitors already established in the blockchain cybersecurity field. Estonia-based Guardtime has been in business since 2007 and offers a variety of security services. These include its Keyless Signature Infrastructure (KSI) and a variety of encryption systems that protect against data breaches or infrastructure attacks and offer enterprise security. The company uses its KSI system to ensure that data remains encrypted by distributing data throughout the chain, making it impossible to alter information without completely destroying every node. Nebulis is a similar blockchain cybersecurity project that is exploring distributed DNS systems that won’t buckle under a DDoS attack. Another possible issue is that Gladius’ tokens are tied to Ethereum’s value. This means they must find a solution for users to exchange their cryptocurrency holdings for fiat or other coins easily. Their desktop interface and dashboard are a step in the right direction, and the company’s token sale is already underway to expand their offerings. For many websites, cyberattacks are more than a threat. With the increased automation of hacks and bots, businesses are more exposed than ever to DDoS and other web-based attacks. Blockchain can greatly reduce these risks, help companies find ways to take advantage of the chain’s security benefits, carve a successful niche, and help catalyze greater adoption of the technology. While Gladius is already taking steps in the right direction for greater security, the company must prove its use case and harness enough acceptance to be truly successful at protecting the web environment.