Decrypted: I wrote about Ping An's annual Investor Day and its Fintech strategy in my last post. It turns out DailyFintech readers are very interested in Ping An's Fintech strategy. So this week I wish to share more for you and we can start from the latest Fintech demonstration of Ping An ' the Smart Insurance Cloud they launched in September This post, which describes recent news coming from Insurtech and Digital Insurance in China, was written by The Smart Insurance Cloud includes two AI-based solutions called Now let's take a look how will Smart Authentication and Smart Claim change insurance. Smart Authentication can cover the following processes With the help of Smart Claim, Ping An has processed more than 4.99 million auto claims in the first half of 2017. Net Promoter Score of Ping An's auto insurance policy reached 82%. This solution has protected Ping An from a risk exposure as high as 3 billion RMB (454 million USD). After Ping An launched it to the whole market, it was expected to save more than 20 billion RMB (3.03 billion USD) risk exposures for the whole auto insurance sector. Our take: The Smart Insurance Cloud, as a complete solution for the insurance industry, is a perfect reflection of Ping An's Fintech strategy. In spite of that Ping An started as an insurance company in the first place, now they have pivoted and call themselves The Smart Insurance Cloud is launched by Ping An's Fintech arm OneConnect. OneConnect was previously called Ping An Fintech Consulting. In the end of 2015, Ping An Group integrated the Fintech, Banktech and Credit subsidiaries all together and created OneConnect. It has grown quickly and now becomes China's largest financial technology intelligence service open platform. OneConnect now provides services for individuals, small and medium banks and financial institutions. It is the key of Ping An's Financial Services Ecosystem. Speaking of Ecosystems, I think I should share with you the four ecosystems Ping An created. They will be the pillars of Ping An's future businesses. They are Financial Services Ecosystem, Health Care Services Ecosystem, Auto Services Ecosystem and Real Estate Finance Ecosystem. And insurance is highly involved in the first three ecosystems. As I mentioned above, Financial Services Ecosystem provides tech platforms for banks and institutions. Health Care Services Ecosystem will connect patients with medical service providers. And it is all built on an information platform called Ping An Health Cloud. While in Auto Services Ecosystem, Ping An is trying to cover from the purchase of a car, all the way to maintenance and to the sell of a used car. Not only individual clients can enjoy better services, the dealers and repair shops can also get enabled with better technologies. The same is happening in Real Estate Finance Ecosystem. Every steps of the business can be enabled by Ping An's technologies. You can read the English presentation of Ping An's Fintech transformation Decrypted: In this part, I will briefly introduce three emerging InsurTech startups in China. Chinese Insurance Epoch (Beijing) Technology Co., Ltd is a big data solution provider for commercial insurance companies. Its services contain risk management and fraud detection in underwriting and claim processes. Their core product is a cloud platform called Insurance Shield Cloud. It can help commercial insurers to verify the validity of customers' identities and score every customer based on public information. Insurers can decide whether or not to underwrite a customer basing on the scores. They can also process verifications on claims. Epoch Technology is quite like the French startup Shift Technology, they both provide anti-fraud solutions. However, anti-fraud is relatively new in Chinese markets, which means a low market recognition as well as a big potential. This is a specialized insurance startup with a focus on the theft protection of electric bikes (e-bikes). They will install a GPS device on policyholder's e-bike, and when the bike is stolen, they will find the bike based on GPS positioning. If they can't get the bike back, they will refund with money or a new e-bike. When they provide service for dealers and manufacturers, they will provide a comprehensive solution which combined insurance, hardware and software. Right now, they have established cooperation with more than 1500 e-bike dealers in Shanghai. It seems to be a great market since China is one of the biggest e-bike markets around the world. However, most of e-bike riders are those with low incomes and low educations, so it is unlikely they will pay for extra premiums just to get a coverage for theft. They might be more willing to buy a few extra locks to keep their bikes safe. So despite of the big market of e-bikes, the supporting insurance services might not be well-received. Dong Xiaoer is a group insurance platform jointly built by Xiaopao Tech and Huize. They provide group insurance for team building activities. Right now they are providing six policies online and all of their prices are very attractive, most of which start at 6 RMB (less than one dollar) Group insurance is not a new thing in China, but Dong Xiaoer made a focus on group building activities which is quite unique. Huize is a huge insurance online market in China, with its help, maybe Dong Xiaoer can get its first batch of customers. And if they gained good credits from the first customers, they might have the chance to seize this one part of the group insurance market.
