Connected cars, homes and lifestyles may still be something of a novelty but that's not likely to remain the case for long. Increasing uptake of such technologies is set to radically change the relationship between insurance companies and their customers. Already, motor insurers are using telematics ' the integration of telecommunications and information processing ' to better understand drivers' risk profiles and offer more personalized products. This is likely to be the norm for motor insurance policies within a decade. But it will also be just part of a much broader shift away from the unidirectional business model traditionally seen in Property & Casualty and Health insurance. Under this system, pricing depends on statistical models that analyze historical information and there's no interaction until renewal ' unless there is a claim or change of address, for example. Any usage or losses are only taken into account during the renewal cycle. Connected devices now provide the platform for a new bidirectional relationship with rich potential to benefit both insurers and customers by replacing a passive model with a highly interactive one. Insurers will evolve to deliver value by acting as a real-time risk concierge or trusted adviser, rather than simply being there in an emergency. Telematics insurance products can collect indicators of customer behavior in near real-time, as already shown with GPS technology and wireless communications in vehicles. Wearable devices that monitor and help manage personal daily activities and connected homes that constantly monitor temperature could help with other forms of insurance such as health. In a connected world insurers will be able to continuously track and refine individual risk profiles, rather than spreading risk among a pool of people based on indicators such as gender, age and profession. Greater price differentiation will result, with savings for those who actively seek to minimize their risks. Proactively offering a risk concierge service could become a crucial way for competing insurers to demonstrate that they offer value on a day-to-day basis for customers used to receiving reliable, real-time information. For example, an insurance provider could warn a policyholder in advance that a road he or she uses every Thursday morning is flooded and suggest an alternative route. Insurers may also seek to deliver value by forging new links with trusted retail partners to create special offers tailored for each customer. This could mean a message telling a driver to expect snow on the way home from work also includes an e-voucher for 10pc off snow tyres at a retail outlet close to their office, for instance. Ultimately, this evolution of the insurance industry could help individuals to lead safer, healthier lives and simultaneously lower losses and transaction costs for insurance providers. But barriers remain: some customers may be put off by device installation and tracking of personal data, high-risk customers are likely to opt out and the gathering and utilization of data often faces delays. There are also difficult questions about the potential for a two-class customer structure with part of the population excluded from the benefits offered by telematics. Insurers will need to proactively work with device and service providers to define acceptable boundaries in relation to use of customer data, whether behavioral, genetic or other. They could soon become dedicated risk managers for many clients but need to show they can achieve this in compliance with data protection laws. Insurers may also seek to deliver value by forging new links with trusted retail partners to create special offers tailored for each customer. This could mean a message telling a driver to expect snow on the way home from work also includes an e-voucher for 10pc off snow tyres at a retail outlet close to their office, for instance. Ultimately, this evolution of the insurance industry could help individuals to lead safer, healthier lives and simultaneously lower losses and transaction costs for insurance providers. But barriers remain: some customers may be put off by device installation and tracking of personal data, high-risk customers are likely to opt out and the gathering and utilization of data often faces delays. There are also difficult questions about the potential for a two-class customer structure with part of the population excluded from the benefits offered by telematics. Insurers will need to proactively work with device and service providers to define acceptable boundaries in relation to use of customer data, whether behavioral, genetic or other. They could soon become dedicated risk managers for many clients but need to show they can achieve this in compliance with data protection laws. Implications for financial intermediaries Insurers' ability to gather and analyze data in real-time will become more important to enable and optimize the benefits from the connected insurance models. As insurers gather both static and behavioral data from customers and become more sophisticated in understanding their riskiness, the role of insurance business within retail financial institutions will become more critical in understanding customers' financial status and needs (i.e., Bancassurance players may benefit the most from insights generated from the connected insurance models) As insurers' relationships with customers become sticker, it will become more difficult for insurers to steal market share and capturing desirable customers from early on in their lifecycle will become critical to build revenue.
