Since 2017 has come to an end, it is important to look at how technology has evolved this year and the role it will play in 2018. One of the advances that has had a significant impact on our society is the role of artificial intelligence in the field of healthcare. Though it has impacted this field in a variety of ways, it is important to understand the many ways AI will continue to improve the healthcare insurance experience. What is important to understand is this desire to improve on the healthcare insurance experience did not come out of the blue; prior research has proven that consumers want intelligent and a personalized conversation when dealing with customer service. While some consumers may feel talking to a person generates more of a satisfactory experience over an automated response, research has shown individuals overall prefer engaging in a dialogue with a virtual assistant than a human being. First, a virtual assistant (VA) is mostly self-employed and provides professional creative, administrative or technical assistance to clients remotely from a home office; they are also known to be called a virtual office assistant. Considering how consumers use a VA on their mobile devices or at home to find out certain information, it is only natural that the next step should be improving on experiences with Health insurance. Here are several ways that other capabilities, combined with virtual assistants, leverage artificial intelligence in transforming consumer interactions regarding health insurance. Last year, a study was conducted that showed the majority of consumers wish to have a dialogue that is intelligent and personalized with customer service; 89% of consumers want to engage in conversation with virtual assistants. Instead of searching on their own through a mobile app or a company’s website for information, customers would prefer the assistance of a VA than a live person. This also benefits the company where one top-five plan recorded 77% first-contact resolution efficiency. The virtual assistant saves the company money by reducing the necessary staff needed to handle such calls. Plans today realize the importance of biometric data is vital in managing conditions that are chronic. Wearables are being used more frequently to collect this key information. The problem becomes that nurses and other skilled personnel are not best suited in collecting this information; technology has advanced to where the patients themselves are better off doing this through their wearables. Virtual agents can then field questions from patients regarding the data by analyzing the information and then either providing the individual with a response or recommend a consultation with their physician. Enrollment increases are most strongly correlated with Medicare Star performance ratings and there is a huge opportunity for plans to utilize emails, text messages and automated phone calls to boost compliance cost-effectively. Examples that would be associated to this are mammograms, diabetic eye and foot exams and more. Considering that a new year of uncertainty and change has arrived for the industry of health plans, the good news for consumers and plans alike is that artificial intelligence has, and will continue to be, a proven way to maximize savings, outcomes and satisfaction. Therefore, there are numerous ways that AI will continue to improve on the health insurance experience for consumers in 2018 and beyond.