After banks, it's the turn of insurance companies to tap fintech startups to give a digital boost to their business. An example is Swiss Re, which set up an insurtech accelerator in the startup hub of Bangalore in India this year, to find and help develop innovative products and services for the insurance industry. These can range from data analytics for predicting health outcomes, to artificial intelligence for smarter customer engagement. As for the startups in this corporate accelerator ' the first by Swiss Re anywhere in the world ' it's an opportunity to validate their ideas in the real world. 'Insurtech startups are innovative, agile and tech-focused, but they may not be fully evolved when it comes to having a strong understanding of global insurance industry dynamics, regulatory environments, and data protection challenges,' explains Amit Kalra, head of strategic initiatives at Swiss Re Bangalore, to Tech in Asia. 'Therefore, it is critical to connect technology and innovation with global expertise.' The Swiss Re accelerator in Bangalore has selected six startups for its first batch. They will get grants and other support, without having to give up any equity in return. The selected startups will have access to the company's global pool of mentors, resources, and operational support ' as well as workspace at our Bangalore office, says Amit. 'The startups will be given insurance business problems and use cases and we will provide domain mentoring through the program. At the end of the program, Swiss Re will host a demo day where the startups will present their ideas to Swiss Re's senior leadership.' The Indian government has been taking initiatives such as the unified payments interface to enable fintech to play a larger role in financial services. This has given a boost to fintech startups over the past year or two, and attracted global initiatives such as the Swiss Re accelerator. This augurs well for fintech startup ecosystem in the country. And now, let's take a look at the six startups in Swiss Re's first global accelerator program in Bangalore: Arya.ai is a developer platform for deep learning. It provides tools, modules, and APIs to help developers build and customize artificially intelligent products based on neural networks. These AI bots can be used in a wide range of real life businesses, from smarter customer engagement to predicting health disorders. 'There will be complete empathy between machines and humans, a symbiotic existence where machines will be helping humans with every task. In the next four or five years, everyone will have a robot of their own,' Arya.ai founder Vinay Marla told Tech in Asia in an earlier interview. Before being selected for Swiss RE, Arya.ai was in Mumbai-based accelerator Venture Nursery. See: An AI study buddy that does the reading for you Another AI startup in the first batch of Swiss RE's accelerator is Niki.ai. It uses AI bots to help users do everything from ordering a cab or food to paying utility bills and online shopping. Niki's virtual assistants do this in partnership with other apps. 'Think about it: you have two different apps for cabs; you have five apps for food ordering, movies, and grocery shopping; you have a few to pay some monthly bills. On average, a consumer has to interact with 20 different apps to do all this. Niki can do it all. Imagine, all those utilities compressed into one small 5 MB app,' Niki's co-founder Sachin Jaiswal told Tech in Asia in an earlier interview. Launched late last year, the AI startup has the backing of Indian tycoon Ratan Tata and Ronnie Screwvala's Unilazer Ventures. See: So what if the Internet sucks in India? This chatbot gets things done eKincare uses predictive analytics for healthcare alerts. It helps users store their medical history online and partners with healthcare and wellness providers. 'We are lowering the barriers for people to consolidate their medical history. We will also convert it into a format ' with color code, graphical history, and timeline ' which is easy to understand,' said Kiran Kalakuntla, founder of Hyderabad-based startup Aayuv, which came up with eKincare, in an earlier interview with Tech in Asia.. eKincare has received seed funding for Bitkemy Ventures, Maheshwari Investment, and angel investors. See: Health monitor eKincare from India will help you spot risks in time Touchkin is another predictive care platform. It uses mobile-based social sensing to enable proactive personalized care ' bringing help to those who need it, from care experts or family members. It uses the smartphone to track unexpected changes in mobility, sleep, or social behavior to generate alerts. The Bangalore-based startup is currently running pilot projects in elderly care and mental health in partnership with healthcare providers. Founded last year, Touchkin got US$400,000 in seed funding recently from a host of investors, including Canaan Partners India head Alok Mittal, InMobi co-founder Amit Gupta, Livspace CEO and co-founder Anuj Srivastava, Aspiring Minds CEO Himanshu Aggarwal, TaxiForSure co-founder Raghunandan G, and Money View co-founder Puneet Agarwal. See: 3 rising startups in India Datasigns leverages data to find underserved markets for financial organizations. It combines non-traditional data with the usual data used by credit providers to make new borrowers eligible through its risk-as-a-service platform. Datasigns gives credit scores and facilitates financial services to those outside the formal system. See: How credit-worthy are you? Find out on this free app GOQii combines its fitness tracking bands with personalized mobile coaching to help people make the shift to a healthier lifestyle. 'I was running a gaming startup before this. It made me round as a volleyball as I would eat too many pizzas and never exercise. After it got acquired, I thought I will download all the fitness apps and get fit. But nothing worked. I had to consult a fitness coach who kept suggesting meals and recommended exercise daily,' GOQii founder Vishal Gondal told Tech in Asia in an earlier interview. GOQii, which now does a similar job of prodding its users to exercise and eat right, got US$13.4 million in seed funding from New Enterprise Associates and Cheetah Mobile.
