Even if you haven't explicitly noticed, chances are you've been successfully courted by an omni-channel strategy. That's because they're so necessary in today's retail landscape that you'd practically have to live under a rock to avoid them. As online-only behemoths like Amazon threaten to devour brick-and-mortar stores, they have no choice but to assimilate into the digital culture. While these strategies are invaluable to retailers, it's not surprising that some companies might still be intimidated by the outlook or feel that they don't have the capabilities or resources to execute a strategy successfully. In a survey from Rakuten, But the data consistently proves that omni-channel is becoming less negotiable with every passing day. An IDC study found that customers who shop across multiple channels bring in a Harvard Business Review reports that of 46,000 surveyed shoppers, a whopping 73% shopped on more than one channel (only 7% shopped online-only, and 20% shopped in-store-only). Findings showed that they spent 4% more on average every time they visited a store and 10% more online in comparison to single-channel shoppers. And when they did research online in advance, they spent 13% more in-store. In short: more channels = more revenue. So how can companies find the inspiration to find a strategy that works for them? Learning by example, of course. Let's take a look at 10 companies that are killing omni-channel, and the examples they're setting for other brands. omni-channel is no longer a choice for retailers ' the name of the game is adapt or be conquered. As we careen into the age of technology, even the older generations are harnessing the power of digital channels to streamline and optimize their shopping experiences and their relationships with brands. There's a lot of competition, but with the right channel strategies and a healthy dose of creativity, you can set your brand up for longevity and stability in a rapidly-changing environment. What will be your legacy in the omni-channel revolution?
