With platforms being one of the most lucrative business models in the digital economy,' the crucial battlefield for retailers has shifted from the high street to a combination of both offline stores and the online world.' Many big retailers such as Walmart and Best Buy have decided to build their strategies around omni-channel sales. Bricks-and-mortar stores will need to be reinvented to stay relevant as omni-channel retail and e-commerce grow in importance. As the importance of e-commerce grows, it is becoming globalized and a few dominant players are emerging. Players such as Amazon and Alibaba have started to allow smaller retailers and sellers of secondhand goods to use their platforms, thereby expanding market share with very little investment. The level playing field being created by e-commerce provides new opportunities for smaller, niche players, while reducing the power held by the traditional 'big brands'. In fact, the very concept of how brands are built could potentially see a transformational shift. Omni-channel retail is one of four themes that we believe will be central to the digitization of the consumer industries over the next decade. The other themes we examine are consumer data flow and value capture, experience economy, and digital operating model. Many bricks-and-mortar retailers appear to be going through an existential struggle. In 2014 in the United Kingdom, 16 stores closed each day, while in 2015 in the United States, high-profile retailers shut down dozens, and in some cases hundreds, of stores. There are two strategies that companies are adopting for survival. One choice is for retailers to invest in their stores so that they offer a truly unique shopping experience, based on excellent customer relationship management and community activities that will attract consumers who might otherwise have opted to buy online. The second option is to transform physical stores into fulfillment centers for e-commerce, providing a convenient point for customers to pick up the products they have ordered. Digital is transforming traditional retail, yet there remain a large number of customers who value face-to-face interactions and in-store experiences, allowing companies to use their existing physical assets to their advantage. For instance, companies could use existing stores to support service, maintenance and product sales. Digital is transforming traditional retail, yet there remain a large number of customers who value face-to-face interactions and in-store experiences, allowing companies to use their existing physical assets to their advantage. For instance, companies could use existing stores to support service, maintenance and product sales. We expect a cumulative 10% physical store closures over the next 10 years, leading to a potential value migration within the industry of more than $300 billion. At the same time, physical store transformations driven by digital technologies is likely to generate additional value for the industry. This value creation is largely from the rationalization of higher cost retail stores and reallocation of inventory to warehouses in an omni-channel world. Real estate reallocation could reduce rental expenses by approximately 30%, resulting in $180 billion savings for the applicable market, while the shift to fulfillment centers should also reduce stockouts by 80%.4 Consumer goods companies could experience a mixed but net positive impact from added demand created by retailers. The combined impact could create around $200 billion in value addition, leading to an overall $500 billion in cumulative value for consumer industries over the next decade. With cross-border e-commerce expected to grow at more than 10% annually in the coming years,5 the battle to become a dominant retail platform is set to involve Internet giants from different parts of the world. As the global e-commerce market coalesces around a small number of huge platforms, this consolidation could also bring with it the possibility of cost and greater revenues. Increasing e-commerce penetration (see Figure 1) will also have a significant impact on the way brands and manufacturers work with their channel partners. The rise of e-commerce has already made the task of managing pricing across channels difficult, as pricing power has gradually shifted from manufacturers to online retailers. As an example, some manufacturers in India have used measures such as restricted warranty for products purchased online to wrest sales back from online marketplaces. We expect e-commerce penetration to grow from around 6% in 2015 to 17% in 2025. This translates to around $450 billion of profit migration from offline channels to online. The migration to e-commerce also has the potential to generate significant benefits for customers ' contributing to more than 250 million hours in time savings over the next decade. The combined value of time and cost savings from online platforms results in a total of $2.7 trillion of overall societal impact over the next decade. The explosive growth of the sharing economy has taken many people by surprise. More than 400,000 people stay in Airbnb properties every night and Uber is valued at almost $50 billion, making it one of the 150 biggest companies in the world.8 As consumers increasingly turn away from buying new possessions, this will have implications for companies whose business models are centered on manufacturing or retailing new products. Companies will need to find new ways of monetizing the trend for consumers to share and sell their used goods with other consumers through online platforms.
