Blockchain and artificial intelligence led the way at Accenture's fourth annual FinTech Innovation Lab Asia-Pacific. Participants in the latest 12-week lab demonstrated their software to dozens of top banking, venture capital and technology executives on November 8. +23373 views in the last 24 hours +25101 views in the last 24 hours Active on Facebook +131373 views in the last 24 hours Active on Facebook +115593 views in the last 24 hours The companies include Blocko ' a blockchain infrastructure provider in South Korea, offering customers digital identity, digital signatures and smart contracts. It wants to work with multinational financial institutions. On the insurance front, CoverGo can support insurance advisors by aggregating a customer's policies and automatically analyzing them for gaps in coverage. Singapore-based microUmbrella.com offers short-term insurance policies, such as personal accident protection for a period as short as one month, travel insurance for a single day or longer and insurance for a phone. Claims are also mobile based - the company promises no forms and no queues. Stash, a healthcare and insure-tech startup provides a single health claims platform for patients, health care providers and insurance companies. The Singapore-based company analyzes claims data to help health providers and insurance companies prevent fraud in claims processing while also reducing administrative costs. From Australia, Tymbals has created a probability network that combines AI and blockchain. By using machine learning to populate and maintain a distributed ledger of enterprise risk, it aims to provide a secure, efficient and cost-effective service to help C-suite executives manage their businesses. The Hong Kong lab attracted two American companies that see it as an opportunity to gain exposure to Asian markets. FutureFlow enables financial institutions and regulators to collaborate. Its software compiles the topology of the movement of money that extends beyond each individual institution's immediate field of visibility. Founders say it can be used for electronic financial crime prevention and economic policymaking. On the investment front, KapitalWise has built a cost-effective micro-investment platform aimed at millennials who, it says, like to invest small amounts more frequently than previous generations. It uses machine learning for cash-flow prediction and financial behavior analysis to help automate savings and investing for the end users. It also offers financial institutions a way to generate leads for their wealth management business from retail customers' accounts. Red Pulse, based in Hong Kong, has a market intelligence platform covering China's economy and capital markets. It uses machine learning and natural-language processing to automate and scale basic data collection while incorporating cryptocurrency.
