When most people think about fintech, or financial technology, a plethora of catch phrases comes to mind: big data, bitcoin, blockchain, crowdfunding, peer to peer, and robo-advisors, to name a few. By Alix Stuart When Bill Aulet, managing director of the Martin Trust Center for MIT Entrepreneurship, and Antoinette Schoar, a professor of finance and Michael M. Koerner (1949) Professor of Entrepreneurship, began thinking about fintech, just one word came to mind: perfect. Bill Aulet “At the intersection of finance and technology, fintech was almost made for MIT,” said Schoar. MIT Sloan is commonly considered the birthplace of modern finance, having housed Nobel Laureates such as Paul A. Samuelson, Robert C. Merton, Myron S. Scholes, and Franco Modigliani at critical junctures in their careers. Fintech is also an area where innovative startups can make a big difference, providing rich fodder for the highly respected entrepreneurship program that Aulet leads. “Fintech is about how you create new solutions in an industry that is changing, but faces significant regulatory dimensions,” Aulet says. “That’s a complicated problem, so it fits our DNA well.” Together, Aulet and Schoar spearheaded the FinTech Ventures program at MIT Sloan in 2014, starting with a club to gauge student interest and then a half-semester class, a student-run conference, and a business plan competition in 2015. In the fall of 2016, MIT Sloan offered its first full semester course in FinTech Ventures in collaboration with MIT’s Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Harvard Law School. Aulet and Schoar consider it the first graduate-level course devoted to entrepreneurship in the financial sector in the country. By almost any measure, fintech is a hot sector. Global investment in the space began spiking in 2014, hitting $19 billion in 2015 and nearly $18 billion in the first three quarters of 2016, according to research by KPMG and CB Insights. Traditional venture investors are crowding the space; but increasingly, established financial companies are joining them, with corporate venture arms participating in better than 25 percent of venture capital deals each year. “It’s a very competitive field right now,” says Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, visiting professor of finance, who teaches the FinTech Ventures course. “It’s as if everyone suddenly woke up to the idea that things are not being done very well.” Yet fintech is also a broad category, covering everything from online banking services to digital currencies and payment systems. For example, “thanks to mobile apps and internet platforms, you no longer need to think of a bank in a physical way,” said Schoar. “Now you can access your bank account or robo-advisor at 10:30 at night, when your kids are finally in bed.” Peer-to-peer payments, consumer loans, and even business loans are also becoming much easier to transact, thanks to distributed ledger systems such as blockchain and digital currencies such as bitcoin. And with greater volumes of digital transactions come greater volumes of usable data, giving rise to increasingly powerful analytic models about how people behave with money and how they are likely to behave in the future. Antoinette Schoar A number of MIT Sloan professors are doing research that is foundational for many fintech applications, including big data and modeling of household financial decisions. Simon Johnson, Ronald A. Kurtz (1954) Professor of Entrepreneurship, has led weekly campus discussions on bitcoin, and is currently exploring the very open question of how central banks will and should engage with it. Last summer, the Bank of England issued its own digital currency; in contrast, the European Central Bank has issued a paper urging members to curb the use of digital currencies. Schoar, meanwhile, has looked at how better data and analytics change how financial companies customize products. “They can use the information to provide better products, but it also comes with risks,” she said. She found evidence that credit card issuers tend to offer less-educated consumers cards with hard-to-understand fees that rise steeply over time, for example, while they offer travel rewards to more sophisticated consumers. While fintech is driving faculty research interests, Aulet and Schoar say it was student demand that ultimately convinced them to launch the FinTech Ventures program on campus. One of those students was Carlos Sánchez Altable, MBA ’16, a banking consultant with McKinsey & Company, who came to campus wanting to understand more about how the industry was evolving. Thanks to an anonymous donation, Aulet was able to hire Altable to coordinate a multipart effort to launch the program as a sector practice leader. “Carlos built the blueprint for how we were going to go about this,” developing contacts in New York and London and attending industry conferences to create “a best-of-breed fintech ecosystem,” said Aulet. For his efforts, Altable won the Patrick J. McGovern, Jr. ’59 Award, which recognizes individuals who have made a significant impact on the quality and overall spirit of entrepreneurship at MIT. Forming a FinTech Club was stage one, and more than 200 students attended one of the 10 events the club organized during the spring of 2015, its first semester in existence. Stage two, a daylong MIT FinTech Conference on campus in May 2015, drew some 300 people. Stage three was a half-semester course in fall 2015, taught by Schoar, and stage four was a business plan competition the following spring. And with 55 slots available, last semester’s FinTech Ventures course received about 100 applications from students across the school, MIT, and Harvard Law School, Schoar said. In FinTech Ventures, students work in groups to formulate business ideas that they could feasibly launch by graduation. This past semester, projects included a blockchain solution to replace paper invoices that Mexican farmers use to obtain bank loans, a lending system that uses utility bill payments as the basis for credit decisions and repayment for consumers with no credit history, and an app that uses behavioral incentives to encourage millennials to repay student loans. A hallmark of the program is its collaboration across campus and across institutions. Notably, Harvard Law School professor Howell E. Jackson, who is also a visiting scholar at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, is a frequent visitor to the class to help students understand how regulations governing payment processors, banks, or lenders might apply to their business plans. Harvard Law School students are part of the mix. “To be in a room where business and technical people can interact with those who know so much about the challenges you have on the legal side is fantastic, and has proven critical in this industry,” said Pepijn van Kesteren, MBA ’16, who took the course in 2015 and is currently working on a new, income-based approach to education financing to make repayment more flexible and less onerous to recent graduates. To help students better understand the industry landscape, the course often includes guest speakers from established financial institutions. An executive from Citigroup spoke about the firm’s internal fintech venture capital arm and what it looks for in investment candidates, said Schoar, while a BlackRock executive spoke about the firm’s experience of integrating robo-advisor capabilities into its investment platform. Leading fintech startup founders and investors are featured in the guest speaker rotation, as well, with Lara Hodgson, founder and CEO of NOW Corp; Inaki Berenguer, founder and CEO of CoverWallet; and Trinity Ventures investment firm partner Schwark Satyavolu (who is also a founder of several technology firms) among those joining the class last semester. These speakers are integrated and utilized to reinforce the fundamental principles and frameworks of the course. Such close access to successful entrepreneurs is a big part of what attracted Sheinal Bhuralal, SF ’17, to the course. “People are very open in this context about what they did right and what they did wrong,” said Bhuralal. He is working with fellow MIT Sloan Fellows Nick DeLeonardis and Alin Dragos, as well as students from Boston University, the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, and Harvard Law School, to help companies finance their wage cycles and address employee wellness issues. Bhuralal has found the speakers to be open to follow-up calls saying, “they’ve helped connect us to others, as well.” In the fast-moving industry, it’s no surprise that the interest goes both ways, with outsiders eager to hear about the students’ progress on various ideas. “One thing a group of MIT students can do better than an insurance company or any established institution is build something clever quick,” said Rhodes-Kropf. The FinTech Ventures program follows a model Aulet first developed a decade ago to help students start firms in the energy industry. Energy was also a tough industry to crack, in large part because of the heavy regulation involved, so “we set up a whole ecosystem around it,” with a club, a class, a conference, and a business plan competition to foster student interest at all levels, said Aulet. That model is also a perfect extension of how the school views finance, said Schoar. “As Nobelworthy as the research is, MIT Sloan has a unique perspective to see it as just the first step to a real-world application, to affect how real markets work, or how real companies do capital allocation and budgeting,” she noted. Aulet is well known for putting methods around what some would call the madness of entrepreneurship. He wrote Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 Steps to a Successful Startup (John Wiley & Sons, 2013) after a career as a serial entrepreneur, running three MIT spinouts after graduating as an MIT Sloan Fellow. Since 2009, he’s been managing director of the Martin Trust Center for MIT Entrepreneurship, which oversees entrepreneurship across all five MIT schools and encourages the growth of student clubs, conferences, competitions, networking events, awards, hackathons, student trips, and accelerators outside the classroom. By 2014, the energy program was thriving, with over 300 entrepreneurs and more than two dozen new companies coming from the course, and Aulet had expanded the same template to the healthcare industry. With an anonymous donation to fund student sector practice leaders for industry verticals starting in 2014, Aulet saw fintech as a perfect candidate to further expand the initiative. Ultimately, he’d like to add venture programs in education, as well as food and agriculture. “There’s definitely value and the opportunity for more specialization in the Entrepreneurship track,” which typically draws one-quarter to one-third of each MIT Sloan class, said Aulet. “Once they do all the introductory coursework, we give them options to focus with like-minded people.” Though the FinTech Ventures program is young, it is already bearing fruit on campus and beyond. Ten fintech business plans reached the semifinals of the MIT $100K Entrepreneurship Competition in spring 2015, and two made it to the final: CurrencyDoc, a multi-currency prepaid card for travelers, and InvoPlace, an online marketplace for small enterprise financing in Latin America. Alfie, the income-based alternative to student loans, won the first fintech business plan competition in spring 2016. Its co-founders participated in the MIT delta v accelerator program in 2016, and hope to get their first pilot off the ground in 2017, said van Kesteren, who is CEO of the startup. Meanwhile, Altable is back at McKinsey bringing a new perspective to his banking clients. “I can help clients make [industry] connections in New York and Boston, so they can talk to people and see how their business might be disrupted,” he said. “I couldn’t have done that before, because I didn’t have that network.” Plans are already in place for this year’s business plan competition. And Aulet and Schoar expect to continue offering the FinTech Ventures class—but never exactly the same way twice. The course, said Schoar, “will evolve over the next five years to reflect the changing face of fintech and new trends in the industry.” For more photos from the NYC Fintech Conference, please visit our Flickr page.