In September, the Philadelphia Police Department posted a surveillance video of a hate crime to its YouTube channel. Shortly thereafter, a handful of civic-minded social media sleuths tracked down the suspects'connecting the video with Twitter photos and Facebook check-ins'and contacted the police. After investigating the leads, the detective on the case Since 2008, the city police have explored social media as a new avenue to protect and serve. Reaching more than 60,000 people with the push of a button, with updates including everything from The benefits of 'having authentic voices engage in public conversation' outweigh the threats of social media, says Susan Crawford, currently a visiting professor at Harvard Law School. Crawford also recently co-authored Up to 75 percent of the population will live in cities by 2050, so finding new ways to make city governments responsive and accountable will become even more important with time. 'Cities are at the heart of citizen-centric services,' says Charles Prow, general manager of the global government team at IBM. That makes them best-positioned to use civic technology to reinvigorate democracy and strengthen the social fabric between the people and their public servants, says Crawford. Social networking is just one of the most visible ways that technology is changing the ways that citizens and their governments can interact and communicate. Big cities like New York and Chicago have embraced the idea that, like many businesses and industries, they can best function as data-driven enterprises. But having direct access to citizen feedback has its own difficulties. The biggest challenge is balancing the need for being responsive'actually listening to citizens and acting to address their needs'without being overwhelmed. There will always be more complaints than policemen, more potholes than construction crews. One way cities can make time for communication is to provide automated services that citizens can access directly. Permits, registrations, service requests'much of a government's work is informational in nature, and historically required lots of paperwork. But these days, when we can do almost anything from our smartphones, paper-bound government processes are increasingly seen as too slow and expensive. 'Governments realize that the expectations of citizens have fundamentally changed,' says Prow, and what citizens want is digital access to government services anytime and anywhere. Self-service government isn't just convenient'it's also more efficient, saving time for employees and lowering costs for taxpayers Ultimately, says Crawford, the more digital tools make it easier to interact with the government, the more confidence citizens will have in the government to provide important public services. The way that technology changes the nature of an interaction has the power to also change the perception of it. When Chicago launched its 'Open311' mobile app, in many ways it was an extension of the city's existing 311 service. But because users were encouraged to submit photos of things they were reporting, it changed the way they felt about the service. People are more used to posting to Facebook or Instagram than calling hotlines, and, when similar programs across the nation were surveyed, users said that the app made them feel like they were helping, not just complaining. Says Crawford, 'the sense of agency it creates is tremendous.' In turn, pictures made it easier for employees to determine the severity of the problem. As an added benefit, because most pictures are geo-coded with detailed location information, work crews know exactly where the problem is and can respond quicker. Mobile apps on a cloud infrastructure are a great 'opportunity to put information in citizens' hands and make citizens real partners in making government work better,' says Prow. Using social technology can even improve face-to-face interaction. Prow notes that nationwide, there are nearly 700,000 caseworkers who are interacting with constituents, but they're a limited resource. 'That creates a bottleneck in how we serve citizens,' Prow says, and 'it's amazing to see the improved engagement when (caseworkers) have access to social analytics.' For example, workers in employment programs can use social networking data to detect warning signs that indicate a slip back toward unemployment, and then work proactively to prevent that. In Manchester, England, a program working with troubled teens found that just a few influencers were responsible for dragging down a bunch of their friends. By focusing only on these few, the caseworkers produced better results'and were able to work more efficiently. And as more services go digital, it will also be important to make sure that all citizens have the devices, cloud-connectivity, and digital literacy to be able to take advantage of them. For citizens in the small town of Jun, Spain, that means all residents need a Twitter account. That's because the town has fully embraced Twitter as a communications platform, and tweets can do a lot more than express an opinion. Even the conference rooms in City Hall have their own twitter accounts: Anyone in town can send a direct message to reserve a room, and a second direct message even unlocks the doors. To make the system accessible, though, the town had to make sure everyone had a unique digital ID and Twitter handle. Just as today's cities are responsible for providing clean water and electricity, says Crawford, it will be important for future cities to provide ubiquitous, cheap, and well-understood digital tools. he real power of social media, however, is that because it's designed to be used with other people, it's inherently humanizing. It strips away barriers'real or perceived'to working together, offering a new way to convene to solve problems, as the collaboration between the Philadelphia police and a handful of citizens proved earlier this year. And the more that technology gives government employees and citizens a way to rapidly and effectively solve problems together, the less that government seems like an abstract entity. Crawford hopes that eventually using such technologies will bring citizens and government closer together, breaking down barriers between civil servants and their constituents, and ushering in a new transparency'and collaboration'to civic engagement. The alternative, she says, is a government 'retreats behind the invisibility of big walls.'
