Jo fan Pang is the ambassador of buzz at CanLaw, and he’s also just 24 years old. Here’s my conversation with him. This article is heavily revised from the transcript of a video conversation by ??? Millennials. CanLaw is a legal tech startup. Legal tech is similar to fintech and is focused on innovating the legal profession using technology. We started off with a lawyer discovery platform, where people could go online, put all their needs on the platform, compare quotes from lawyers, and then make bookings with them. We’ve also moved on to doing different things like running an online legal news site called The CanLaw Report, where we try to make the law and new legal developments fun, engaging, and shareable. How we do it is we put GIFs, memes, and those kinds of things to make it fun for people to understand. Recently, we are also doing workshops and consultancies for lawyers who want to adopt technologies as well. We are branching into that and seeing how we can move there. Well, I think a lot of people know me as a student activist and human rights activist, but even earlier than that, I was also a tech geek. After finishing my legal studies, this opportunity came by from friends who were working on this startup. I like law and I love tech too, so I thought this was a great idea. I did some research as well on what legal tech startups are doing overseas. They are doing great things, changing the legal profession in places like the US, the UK, and Australia. By implementing technology, you do not just help lawyers upskill themselves but also help people access lawyers more easily. So, for me, it is still at the heart of what I am very passionate about, which is increasing access to justice and human rights. A lot of people we speak with just don’t know where to find a lawyer. They ask their friends’ friends, and that’s pretty much it. They don’t even know whether that lawyer is good or not. I feel that access to justice is still very low, not just in terms of accessing lawyers but also the knowledge required. That’s why I run The CanLaw Report. I think the millennials are just turned off by legal articles, those boring shit. I want to make it fun and engaging. I don’t want to just follow the system. My job is a lot about making people know what CanLaw is in a viral and fun way. Basically, it’s a fancy name for marketing and communications. I think content marketing is really big nowadays. From what I read, people are less responsive to ads. That’s why people have ad blockers and that kind of stuff. Now, they’re more interested in reading things like “3 things you did not know about your tenancy agreement that might screw you up”—that kind of thing. Or “What happened to the Chatime situation?” That’s how we make people know about what CanLaw is. For me, the past 10 months have been successful in a way. I wouldn’t say it’s a movement. We try. To me anyways—I don’t think I can speak for them—I think it’s not something that everyone will want to do, especially in this climate with more conservative people in the legal profession. I think it’s the passion that you want to see it happen and you will try while you can and see what you can do. It’s about keeping the goal and making sure that you somehow get there. I really feel that there is a need for more access to the total justice system. There’s so much potential in the legal profession; there are so many new lawyers coming up, new ways people are doing law, and new ways that people give access to justice to the people. But there needs to be a certain change in the regulations. For me, I’m happy to be part of this change. When I started for the first few months, I joined this thing called the Maxis Inspire Challenge. That was probably my first time getting involved with a startup competition. It was my first time meeting startup people, networking with them, talking about my ideas, and pitching. So that was weird. Somehow we won that, and it was pretty awesome. For me, this type of thing is actually something that I feel that I can do and would be interested in doing—to spread the idea of what we plan to do at CanLaw and our dreams and ideas. That’s really my turning point when I realized that I wanted to do this. At the moment, I can only see how it looks like from others. My two other co-founders, Edwin and Soon Yi, just had their babies; Soon Yi might have his baby within the week. I can really see how he’s juggling it. Whether I can do that or not is a separate thing, but I think within five years, I still see myself here. I am going to try to do what we can to make a difference while staying afloat as a company, of course. If nothing goes wrong, I will still be here. I don’t know whether being a millennial is an advantage. I don’t take instruction very well. I always ask why before doing anything. I will be like, “I don’t know why we are doing this. Don’t just tell me what to do, tell me why you are doing it, and l will figure out a better way to do it.” I always want to take ownership of what I want to do, and I guess it helps them as well because it pushes them to think it over again. We develop together because I don’t just do this and do that, so it pushes the team along the way. I think that helps. I think the typical thing would be to say, “Just go for it,” but I think what I would say is “think about it properly first.” You don’t want to be a burden to your family or to your girlfriend or boyfriend, so you need to make sure that you think about it pragmatically first. How long do you want to do it? How long are you going to support it? Is it practical? Once all those are sorted out, just go for it. I think I wouldn’t be an advocate of the mindset of just screwing all this and going for it. Just think about it first. Since this covers everyone, we need to solve the smallest and most basic and fundamental problems. I think, for me, the biggest problem in the world now is inequality. There are so many people who have no full access to water, education, and justice. Not everyone is born equal, so there needs to be laws to put everyone on an equal platform. For me, I think there needs to be a law—if it is enforceable—that everyone needs to have the right to education. So, every kid needs to at least graduate university or maybe even just high school, for example. That would really solve most other problems.