When Uber crashed into global markets with its American guns blazing, it sent a message that it didn’t have time to cater to the individual laws of its scores of target markets. It certainly has the world’s attention now, but not without heavy costs, considering the legal battles it’s had to wage from the US to Indonesia and South Korea. Uber is one of many startups that are joining banks and Fortune 500s in the race to go global. And its legal woes show that big or small, companies that expand internationally often get stuck in legal muck as they stumble with learning and adapting to foreign regulations. Local governments within a single country still struggle to get on the same page and make their information easily accessible, but it’s a problem that technology has largely yet to solve. The legal tech industry is still ripe for disruption worldwide, and solutions for mending the legal gaps are still few and far between. FiscalNote, a Washington-based startup, aims to bring the conversation to Asia. CEO Tim Hwang envisions a future with a globally transparent and fluid legal infrastructure, where a patent lawyer can look up laws that are changing in Paris, Tokyo, or Singapore in real time as easily as one reads the news, and instantaneously understand the context of how it will affect a business. “The legal industry is one of the largest industries on earth. It’s a trillion-dollar-plus industry, and when I think about technology and the broader trends within pretty much every major industry, the legal industry has not been disrupted,” he tells Tech in Asia on a recent visit to Seoul, South Korea. “There’s no data analytics, there’s no artificial intelligence, they barely have mobile applications.” But current market leaders like Thomson Reuters and LexisNexis, which have built a US$10 billion-plus market over the last few decades, have no impetus to innovate or change, he says. “I think for us to be the real category leader in technology innovation in the legal space is going to be a massive, massive driver of ways in which people are interacting with legal information and the broader relationship between the legal system and people.” Tim learned the frustrations from experience. Before entering the startup world, he began his political career at age 17 when he was elected as a student member to the board of education in his home state of Maryland in the US, and later led the grassroots nonprofit National Youth Association. He faced the recurring problem of constantly finding himself short of time to prepare for bills he had to fight. The US is made up of a complex Congress system, 50 state governments, and some 3,000 municipalities, and analyzing how laws change across the country takes significant time, he explains. Tim says most attorneys hire massive staffs to create these reports manually, and law firms charge companies ungodly amounts, from US$100,000 to $200,000 for a 50-page analysis, which is well out of the budget of a startup, local politician, or NGO. “This is a really dumb problem, just trying to get information. It’s not an incredibly hard problem in the 21st century,” he says. From a computational perspective, he explains, it’s easy to build systems to aggregate and classify information, and a web app to access all of it. So he and two friends built a search engine to look up laws around the country in real time, and they incorporated FiscalNote in 2013. Tim, 22, is now at the helm of a startup that’s raised US$18 million from the likes of China’s Renren, Singapore’s Temasek Holdings, and Taizo Son’s San Francisco-based Visionnaire Ventures, which has extensive networks in Japan. With an emphasis on its high-octane engineering, the startup crawls legal files to aggregate a massive database of laws and bills, and also analyzes them to predict their probability of passing through to law and to determine how it will affect businesses. It has secured clients from corporates to startups and government, media, and NGOs including Lyft, Aetna, the University of Virginia, and Planned Parenthood. The startup aims to push the envelope in terms of the way people access legal content, Tim says. It aims not only to make laws searchable online, but also use speech and text recognition to extract real-time information. In essence, it wants to create a Siri for law (and even has a new iOS app) by building a system that does predictive analysis and delivers the information to offer legal advice to customers in an automated fashion. FiscalNote has the US legal infrastructure down pat, but globalization is becoming a bigger variable for its clients, including startups like Lyft. That’s where FiscalNote’s helpfulness ends – for now – as systemizing government data worldwide is a feat that even world bodies struggle with. But that’s the information that multinational companies really need. “As companies globalize, their risk globalizes, but the governments are not working together to make their laws interoperable,” he says, citing Google’s segmented data privacy issues around the world. Because countries in Europe, Asia, and North America pass vastly different laws on the same issue, the research and operational costs for a global company go up. That’s precisely why FiscalNote itself is one of such companies expanding abroad. Open data and transparency movements around the world are leading governments and companies to increasingly digitize their content. As accessing information becomes cheaper and easier, the pressure is growing for FiscalNote to internationalize faster, Tim says. The startup made its first foray into Asia in September, acquiring South Korean political candidate database platform MyCandidate, which saw major popularity ahead of elections last year for creating a forum between voters and candidates. Tim points to Korea’s high mobile penetration, existing strong digitized database, and willingness to adopt enterprise software as making the market an “easy win” for FiscalNote, hoping that the experience there will help it create an international strategy playbook to expand into China and other countries. MyCandidate founder Rebekah Kang, while prepping her Korean app for the 2016 elections, is now FiscalNote’s Asian market development manager. But the rest of Asia may be a tougher nut to crack. Tim is less worried about translation, for which technology is already being engineered, than he is about content aggregation. China and Japan are both isolated markets, and infrastructure across the continent for legal information online is in its early days. Tim knows the US startup can’t do it all alone. Its strategy for expansion is to not to do everything itself, but take the “Microsoft approach” to build a broader ecosystem of partnerships in distribution, content, and branding. Some Asian startups have jumped into the nascent legal tech scene, from India’s VakilSearch, a platform that connects companies with lawyers and accountants, to Hong Kong-based Dragon Law, which provides software to help businesses draft legal documents and get advice. Zhiguoguo is an online legal services startup specializing in intellectual property in China, and LawCanvas in Singapore focuses on creating legal documents for startups. But many of them focus on administrative problems. FiscalNote’s focus is past the paperwork – its unique play is its algorithm technology that analyzes factors such as a politician’s success history in passing a bill to predict the likelihood of it passing, which can help a business shape its strategy according to each market’s laws. One problem is getting businesses to accept new technology – to what extent are they willing to adopt this tech to enhance their day-to-day operations? Even well-established companies like S&P, IBM, and Oracle struggle to convince companies to use very basic, acronym-heavy enterprise software such as CRM, ERP, and GRC, which many American companies have long been using, Tim says. FiscalNote hopes to harness the open data movements in Japan and Singapore to digitize government data and content online in an aim to spur innovation. It is also seeing a willingness for other Southeast Asian countries to join the movement as their economies quickly grow, such as in Indonesia, where FiscalNote sees a growing need for attorneys and a more robust legal system. But in China, he does not see transparency issues as the woe, but a lack of infrastructure. The content he needs – legislative, regulatory, and case law information – is not locked up, Tim explains, but distributed widely across the country in private institutions and government agencies. The way law firms are structured is not conducive toward broad-based enterprise software and technology, he adds. “Quite frankly, governments are not very technologically savvy, so that’s been the bigger challenge. If I had to categorize the biggest challenge facing the company, it’s that governments are incredibly difficult to convince from a technology perspective,” he says. However, he’s optimistic that things are changing. “I think the Chinese government, just like any other government, wants the rule of law, and one of the components to rule of law is access to legal information. So you need to understand what the law is to be able to comply with the law.”