A zipping comes across the sky. The Australian test flight and 30 others like it conducted in mid-August are the culmination of the first phase of Project Wing, a secret drone program that's been running for two years at Google X, the company's whoa-inducing, long-range research lab. 'What excited us from the beginning was that if the right thing could find anybody just in the moment that they need it, the world might be radically better place,' Teller said. And one day in 2011'before any of us had seen these new ideas'he is talking with Astro Teller, whose goatee is more salt than pepper, and they make an observation about the world. 'Google X has this experience all of the time in all of these different projects,' Teller said. People count all the problems created by our current way of life as zero because that's what we're used to as the societal default, he contended. Conversely, people immediately see the negatives of any new thing. 'We are not deaf to those issues and we're really eager to talk to society about how to mitigate those,' Teller said. 'But part of our conversation with society is about us listening, but also trying to remind the people that we talk to that the place we're starting from is not zero. In this case, for delivery, cars, airplanes create a very large carbon footprint and have a lot of safety issues.' Roy was perhaps a less-than-obvious choice. For one, he'd never worked on drones flying outside. The challenges of the wind were new to him. Roy neither had a traditional aeronautics background nor had he dealt in logistics. Look back on his resume from the early 2000s, as he prepared to finish his PhD at Carnegie Mellon: There are almost no signs that he'd be the guy Google X would one day tap for a drone project. His most prominent work had been on tour guide and nursing robots. So, now, Teller's'and, by extension, I will assume Brin's'big-picture vision has shifted to the ways ubiquitous, two-minute delivery can transform people's relationship to stuff. And unicorns might win the Kentucky Derby, too! But one would need to find a unicorn first before it could enter the race. The design is simple. There is a tail that serves as a stand, a central plastic body, and two wings made out of foam board covered in a thin skin for protection from the elements. There are four rotors attached to the vehicle, two on the underside closer to the body, and two on the outside towards the edges of the wings. In aeronautics, hybrid craft that combine elements of fixed-wing planes and helicopters do exist, and certainly aerospace companies experimented with them. But they are more complex because they have to execute two entirely different tasks: moving air on different axes. In some cases, such as the new F-35B, Lockheed Martin built rotating jets into the plane body that can be pointed at the ground to achieve liftoff, then rotated in the air, to push the jets through the sky. Imagine all the possible ways one might get something from high in the air down to the ground. How about a tiny parachute ' la The Hunger Games? Roy's team tried it. There was too much wind interference and they struggled with accuracy. How about literally firing them down, a ballistic approach? 'We contemplated this,' Roy said. 'And then Sergey walked out from under a balcony and we almost hit him in a drop test.' After that, they moved on. When a package comes hurtling down, it moves at about 10 meters per second (about 22 miles per hour). When it gets close to the ground, the winch slows the fall to 2 meters per second for a relatively soft landing. * * * Finding and learning how to deal with all the possible edge cases, and coming up with safety procedures for what to do when the robot doesn't know what to do is actually what forms the core of these big, long-term development programs. One area where humans might be less helpful is the development of detect-and-avoid software that could help the drones deal with birds, other UAVs, helicopters, and the like. Some'some'of these issues could be solved by regulation that creates certain corridors or layers of air space for drones, as well as requiring transponders or other signaling mechanisms on all humanmade flying things. But that's not a complete solution because as Teller put it, the birds aren't going to wear instruments. The sky is voluminous and these vehicles are small. It's a lot less crowded than the country's road networks, and flying things can move in all directions. Roy's team found it difficult to even trigger their sense-and-avoid systems when they tried to do so intentionally by flying remote-controlled planes at them. So, the self-flying vehicles need these systems for ultimate reliability and autonomy, but they are exceptionally difficult to build'and to test. Recall that the initial application for drone delivery was sending defibrillators winging across cities. Well, many cities have solved this problem in a different way. They keep the machines geographically scattered across a city. That may be inelegant. That may be slightly wasteful. But it's simple, it's easy, and it does not require the invention and intervention of a flying robot. There are other cargo drone believers, even outside Silicon Valley. In Europe, there is an entire organization'the Platform Unmanned Cargo Aircraft (PUCA)'devoted to bringing people together around the idea. Their vision of the future would see large cargo planes carrying between 2 and 20 tons of cargo flying relatively slowly and cheaply from places underserved by the existing infrastructure. One controller on the ground could handle 10 to 30 cargo planes flying at less than 300 miles per hour to save fuel. They could travel at all times of night and day, creating a more flexible in-filling logistics service to the current cargo system. In this scenario, cargo drones are like flying buses, not the speedy vanguard of two-minute delivery. 'The qualities of a donkey are similar to what is required for a cargo drone: surefooted, dependable, intelligent, able to deal with dust and heat, cheap, uncomplaining,' Ledgard wrote. 'The choice of the name 'donkey' for cargo drones is deliberate. A donkey is not a Pegasus, associated with speed. It does not bomb, does not monitor. It flies stuff between here and there, that is all.'
