The number of smart homes set to reach 500-700 million globally by 2020, demand is rising for smart home technologies to reduce energy usage and cost. tado' is a company focused on home climate control. Driven by its mission of smart energy management without sacrificing comfort, tado' believes it is possible to live comfortably and still act responsibly. Since 2012, tado' has been connecting heating systems with the internet and making their control even smarter. In June 2015, tado' augmented its service with a Smart AC Control that enables consumers to intelligently control air conditioners. Their app adjusts to the residents' behavior in real time and also takes current weather forecasts and building characteristics into account. tado' GmbH is a Munich based tech startup bringing Internet of Things into the Cleantech Market. The modern energy provider strives to offer energy based solutions rather than pure Kwh's of energy. Therefore energy companies like E.On, SSE, Essent, GNF and many more bundle their energy tariffs with a tado Smart Thermostat into a Smart Gas tariff. The experience over the last years shows that such bundles result in significantly more loyal energy customers. In fact these customers stay twice as long with their energy company before changing the provider. In addition tado enables energy companies to offer innovative data driven services like remote monitoring of heating systems for more cost effective repair and maintenance processes or demand response purposes to stabilize the energy grid. In fact tado reduces the energy consumption of the households. So it takes some effort to convince the management of energy companies that it is worth more to create loyal customers which stay longer than selling more energy per year. tado' is really about putting the customer in the center of all activities and this in the end pays off for everyone. InfluxData enabled us to store and process IoT sensor data at scale in a cost effective way. We also take advantage of the InfluxCloud offering which reduces our maintenance and administration effort and lets us focus on our core business. Working with energy providers, tado is able to provide instant access to daily insights and a full year's view of users' home temperature. Unprecedented convenience and efficiency are now only a click or swipe away. Functionality gained includes easy setup (Smart AC Control connects to the home Wi-Fi - no additional device or wiring is needed); location awareness (using residents' location, the AC self-regulates automatically to detect the first person returning, cools before they get home, and saves when residents are away); control from anywhere (tado' mobile app allows users to check and change settings remotely while on the move); cost savings (users can save up to 40 percent on AC costs, and tado' can pay for itself in less than a year); and much more. tado' is constantly evolving to incorporate the latest trends in smart home technology and today sells its devices worldwide. tado' GmbH Head of Server Development Michal Knizek and member of the technical staff Florian Rampp led the architecture design behind the company's heating and cooling control products.
