The City of Adelaide is getting ready to construct a transformational ten gigabit fibre-optic network that will deliver lightning fast data speeds to the city. In what will be an Australian-first, the network will 'interconnect' to cloud-based data centres across the globe, enabling synchronous data speeds that are virtually unachievable with traditional internet services. Complementing the current NBN rollout and the State Government's Gig City project, the network will enable city-based businesses, institutions, governments, researchers, creatives and entrepreneurs with the ability to connect directly to each other and, at the same time, export their services to the world. Once in place, the network will benefit nearly all industries including health and wellbeing, finance, defense, advanced manufacturing, information management, cyber security and the public sector, and will underpin future innovation in areas such as robotics, artificial intelligence, way-finding, 3D printing and augmented reality. The network is just another example of Adelaide's commitment to being a 'smart city' ' a key focus of the City of Adelaide 2016-20 Strategic Plan. 'A ten gigabit fibre-optic and cloud based network is precisely the type of technology infrastructure that will position Adelaide as one of the world's smartest cities,' said City of Adelaide Lord Mayor Martin Haese. 'This is fundamental architecture that is needed to future proof Adelaide in the digital age. It will open up global opportunities for business growth, enable endless opportunities for international project collaboration and transform how we learn across universities, medical precincts, research facilities and schools. 'Furthermore, it will put Adelaide firmly on the radar as a destination of choice for large, digital-reliant businesses and organisations in the health, finance, education, creative and defence sectors, helping to attract new businesses, creating more jobs and driving innovation and investment.' Following a successful EOI process earlier this year, City of Adelaide staff are assessing business models to be presented to Elected Members for consideration in the coming months. If endorsed, construction on the network is likely to start by the end of 2017, ready for roll-out in early 2018. While plans for the network ramp up, industry are already taking note. Ian Coker, Operations Manager of Bureau Veritas South Australia, a leading engineering, testing and inspection firm, sees huge opportunities to capitilise on high speed data infrastructure through real-time data streaming. 'The majority of our work is dispersed inspection and non-destructive testing of assets, most of which is being digitised. If we could tap into a ten gigabit network, we could centrally locate qualified inspectors and engineers to make real-time decisions rather than having hundreds of field staff flying in and out of remote locations,' Ian said. 'This could be a real game changer for our industry and I imagine many others.' Keen to learn more? Register your interest today! *) Featured image: Syed Abdul Khaliq (cc) **) About the Author: Peter Auhl is CIO of the city of Adelaide. Peter is passionate about meaningful Digital Transformation and Government 'getting out of the way' and letting people make their own decisions to shape their futures. To achieve this at State and Local Government levels, Peter has built focussed, action oriented teams united by a vision of enabling economic growth and creating smarter, more connected communities through technology.
