I started measuring details of my life in 1997 and have been doing so without missing a day for the past 7000 days. I log the times when I go to bed or wake up; projects I worked on and a score between 1 and 10 for my mental, physical and emotional status. By now, I have tested and used about 40 devices and gadgets that measure health parameters or vital signs. Thus, I know that finding the right healthcare wearable is a struggle. Sometimes technology in itself does not provide much help. For example, the Amazon Wearable marketplace has so many devices, it makes even harder to choose. Also, there are many problems you might encounter. A bunch of technological problems might arise: the device requires constant attention, needs to be charged constantly, Bluetooth connections unpair randomly and synchronization might be a nightmare. And when you finally 'master' technology, it takes the skills of an IT guru combined with that of a trained physician to interpret the data. Some makers of healthcare wearables are better than others at providing insight into how to live better instead of dumping meaningless data in the users' lap. But first of all, let me help you with finding the best health trackers and wearables. As the The Medical Futurist, I'm objective but as an experienced Quantified Selfer, I have my own choices which might also help you to live more healthily. You surely know from the tale of Sleeping Beauty that the survival of empires could depend on a good night's sleep. Research shows sleep is very important to brainpower, health, beauty or overall well-being. Sleep trackers usually measure when you fall asleep, wake up and how much time you spend in deep-sleep. The latter is the most important, for me. For some people, how well-rested they feel depends on how much sleep they get. For others, it only depends on the amount of deep-sleep. As it's pretty personalized, everyone needs to find their own solution. You can download my guide for a better sleep here. The most popular and widely known healthcare wearables are the fitness and sport activity trackers. Most smartphones already have built-in apps for measuring how many steps you take a day, whether you run (even to catch the bus) or bike. The activity trackers might also measure your pulse rate and create colorful graphs and charts to help you figure out the best ways to keep fit and healthy. Stress is one of the biggest health risks in the 21st century's busy environment, full of constant impulses and distractions. As you probably know, stress might lead to heart disease, obesity, diabetes, gastrointestinal problems, headaches, anxiety ' and even asthma. It reduces your level of focus, leads to bad sleep and decreases emotional well-being. It affects everyone ' and I'm no exception. However, stress can be fought successfully with the help of technology. Hypertension is one of the most common chronic conditions throughout the world. In the United States, nearly 80 million Americans have high blood pressure. Many clinicians and patients use home blood pressure monitors to help manage high blood pressure, helping with everything from medication titration to supporting lifestyle modification. For some people, measuring weight might constitute an unpleasant daily activity since obtaining and keeping optimum weight is one of the greatest challenges for many, in an age when people often assume the 'perfect body image' equals success and health. It definitely does not, but weight still constitutes an important factor to our health. As you know, obesity might lead to heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure and even stroke or cancer. On the other hand, being too skinny also leads to health problems such as anemia, low immune system or fertility issues. Thus, it is very important to find your optimum weight, right body mass index (BMI) and to measure it on a regular basis. Your heart beats around 100,000 times per day. If you allow smart gadgets to access, track and analyze your heart's health, you can predict and even prevent a host of problems, including serious diseases such as a sudden heart attack. An optimal body temperature is important. You surely remember vividly when you fell sick as a child, and the first thing your mom did was check your temperature ' which took long minutes of sitting still with a clinical thermometer stuck to your tongue or in your armpit. Luckily, recent innovations allow you to measure temperature in a fast and frustration-free way. As you already know, managing stress is vital to your health. There are many ways to effectively reduce your stress level, and you should definitely spend time finding the best possible way to do so. A popular method is meditation, which has been scientifically shown to reduce symptoms associated with stress, depression and anxiety. Although you might not want technology messing with your brain; it might actually help you to reach a calm and relaxing state of mind easier. If the tons of information coming from every possible media channel, magazine and common sense cannot convince you about the health benefits of exercising, neither can I. However, you should know that according to the US National Cancer Institute, leisure-time physical activity is associated with longer life expectancy. And it does not matter whether you like to use the treadmill, do cross-fit or aerobic, some healthcare wearables can help you make the most of the exercises. A mistake people often make when wanting to use technology to live better is rushing to buy a wearable device. Devising a way to optimize your life is up to you. A wearable can only show you data, which won't be actionable if you don't know what should be changed. I advise you to start by scoring your mental, physical and emotional health in a simple Excel or Google spreadsheet. Despite my numerous devices, I still use such a spreadsheet every day. It helped me to understand how my body works, and understanding the problem itself is the first step towards the solution. Living better starts with vigilance about our health rather than using technology. I hope you will start upgrading your health and that you find useful methods and motivation in my experience.
