The fitness tech industry has come up with plenty of ways to monitor your health and your training regime. Your garden-variety Fitbit or Xiaomi Mi Band can give you information on your heart rate, the distances you run, how often you train, and more. So that takes care of the corpore sano but what about the mens sana part? Singaporean startup Neeuro has stepped up to tackle that. It’s come up with a headband with electroencephalogram (EEG) capabilities – that’s a huge Greek word that means it’s reading your brainwaves. It’s called the Neeuro Senzeband and it’s basically a Fitbit for your mind – a comparison co-founder and CMO Kelly Choo is very enthusiastic about.Brain callisthenicsThe Senzeband is equipped with EEG sensors, an accelerometer for tracking head movement, and bluetooth syncing to talk to your smartphone or tablet. It supports both iOS and Android devices. Its battery can last for up to four hours of usage.The headband pairs with the Neeuro Memorie mobile app, also developed by the company. The app contains a number of games that can be played on a phone or a tablet, with the aim of stimulating particular areas of your brain and training your mind on specific tasks.It’s called the Neeuro Senzeband and it’s basically a Fitbit for your mind.The games have been designed with the help of neuroscientists so that users can train their brain in functions like memory, attention, spatial skills, multitasking, and decision making. For example, the game MindCopter requires your focus to fly a helicopter. Sitting Ducks, where the titular ducks change positions in a cartoon pond, challenges your memory and attention.The app can then give you stats on your performance, let you know what functions of the brain you trained in, and give you goals to complete.The idea is that, after our twenties, our brains inevitably start deteriorating as the excesses of our reckless youth take their toll. However, studies have shown that by keeping our brain active through proper training, we can delay that deterioration and avoid more serious brain afflictions in the future.The gamified approach to this kind of mind workout isn’t new (titles like Dr. Kawashima’s Brain Training by Nintendo spring to, erm, mind). Neeuro’s difference lies in using the Senzeband to actually monitor your brainwaves and thus the effect of your exercises. Its success will depend on whether the hardware lives up to its promise of providing demonstrable benefits for your brain functions.Turning to the crowdWith the promise of a futuristic wearable that can help you hone your mind through gaming, it’s no surprise that Neeuro is currently smashing through its targets on Indiegogo. Its crowdfunding campaign kicked off at the start of the week and it’s already more than halfway to its goal of US$50,000 – with about a month to go.“Crowdfunding is like the ‘social media version of funding’ and is a game changer in the digital space,” Kelly tells Tech in Asia. “We want to engage the global community to give us feedback on the markets and interests, which is very valuable to us,” he adds.Kelly says that within 48 hours the team had orders from more than 25 countries and received a lot of interesting usage ideas from backers. For example, a North American chain of senior nursing homes wants the product to keep its tenants active for a healthier mind. A psychiatrist wants to use it to give his patients neurofeedback therapy. Families are looking for packs of four bands. There’s even a company that wants to assess prospective employees with it, finding out their strengths and weaknesses on particular tasks through their game performance – which hopefully will be less dystopian than it sounds.Neeuro is working with neuroscientists as well as Singapore’s prestigious Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR) in developing the games and the tech behind the product. The founding team consists of three people: Kelly and chairman Eddie Chau previously co-founded the social media intelligence startup Brandtology (acquired in 2011 by Australian media intelligence company Isentia). Dr. Alvin Chan, an expert in data science and artificial intelligence, is the third co-founder and the CEO.The startup is a social enterprise and a member of Singapore’s Center for Social Enterprise (known as Raise). Kelly says Neeuro set out to be a for-profit company, but also have a positive impact on society, which is why it went down that route.“Neeuro advocates using technology to train your brain for a healthier mind,” he explains. “We acknowledge that there is still a lot to do in this aspect – at schools, medical facilities, and our own homes as well. By being actively involved in this advocacy, we share our knowledge, expertise, and of course our mind wellness technologies to those who might need it.”Gearing up productionThe startup hopes to deliver the product to backers in June 2016. At launch, the band will cost US$299 and the Memorie app containing the games will go for US$149; a total price of US$448. While the device’s cost isn’t too surprising, the cost of the app might sting a little.Neeuro is working with neuroscientists to develop the games and the tech.However, Neeuro plans to continue updating it with new content, which makes it a bit easier to stomach. Plus, anyone who backs the project now can get the whole package for as cheap as US$129 (plus shipping), so that’s something.The team has almost finished working on the final product and the final version of the app – which is where a successful crowdfunding comes in. That will also help in securing the necessary certifications and getting the manufacturing process going.For the future, Neeuro wants to explore different applications of the Senzeband, like learning and sleep quality improvement. Then, by the end of 2016 the startup wants to launch two new products, also geared toward mental health care. More details will be revealed in due time, Kelly says.