Continued from page 4The NBA identified a pattern based on a common activity within the game. Here are a few examples where patterns are likely to be found in the music industry; the genre of playlists people are listening to, the time of day people listen to certain genres, and the effect that holidays, political events, or an artist's passing have on music consumption.Image above showcases another example of engagement data.This is a modal window.Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window. +87130 views in the last 24 hours Active on Facebook +25875 views in the last 24 hours Active on LinkedIn Active on Facebook Active on LinkedIn The NBA identified a pattern based on a common activity within the game. Here are a few examples where patterns are likely to be found in the music industry; the genre of playlists people are listening to, the time of day people listen to certain genres, and the effect that holidays, political events, or an artist's passing have on music consumption. Image above showcases another example of engagement data. BUZZFEED & ENGAGEMENT DATA Buzzfeed is a social news and entertainment company. Buzzfeed invented an internal proprietary metric that curates articles based on reader preference. They do this by measuring the "rate of shares over time," within the first weeks of an article's release. Buzzfeed decided that a reader sharing a piece was more valuable than a click. Have you ever clicked on an article or played a song and walked away from your computer? What the act of sharing an article or saving a song to your Spotify collections shows is a higher level of engagement in comparison to a stream or a click. Arguably, this is helping to ensure a return on your investment. So a "share" is more valuable than a "click," and a "collection" is more valuable than a "stream." By calculating the "rate of shares over time" or the "rate of collections over time," you're not only making sure that the consumers you are targeting are engaged but that they are growing significantly over time. As of mid-2017, Buzzfeed was estimated at approximately $1.7 billion dollars and was processing roughly seven billion monthly content views. With the sheer volume of streaming data growing year over year, the ability to enhance and fine-tune marketing capabilities in the music industry is endless. It comes down to access to the data that you need and the software capabilities to intelligently process and act upon that information. Moving forward into 2030, success as a label will come down to a company's ability to pair its human capital with intelligent software.