Adobe Analytics Cloud, the customer intelligence engine service within the Adobe Experience Cloud, is known for providing actionable insights to businesses leveraging accurate, timely and insightful data. Adobe Analytics Cloud includes Adobe Analytics and Adobe Audience Manager. Adobe Analytics Cloud ' which was built on the Adobe Cloud Platform (open APIs) and Adobe Sensei (AI and machine learning framework) ' makes it possible for brands to aggregate and comprehend large sets of their own data and translate it into singular profiles of their customers. Today Adobe has announced it is adding several major advancements in Adobe Analytics. The new features provides employees with intelligence curated for their roles throughout the organization. What are the new features? The new features include Context-Aware Sessions, Audience Analytics and Analysis Workspace enhancements -- which make it easier for brands to combine dimensions, metrics and date range in any combination with the ability to query billions of rows of data in seconds. Plus Adobe added improvements to the virtual report suite for mobile teams. Context-Aware Sessions is a new feature within Analysis Workspace that allows marketers to flexibility define an experience of a customer from beginning to end. Through Context-Aware Sessions, mobile app product managers can strategically gain insights about which features tend to resonate with their users. Adobe Analytics senior director of product marketing Jeff Allen said that when you think of a car company, there are different teams selling cars, building in-car experiences, handling maintenance and distributing accessories. 'The context is super key because there might be a constituency who wants to understand the customer lifetime value with that car company across the board,' said Allen. 'What we're trying to do is cater to the needs of all these different constituencies because they think inside one brand about different interactions with a single individual. The customer experiences vary by the context of where they are in the journey.' Allen explained to me that a session is a sequence of interactions that a person has with a brand that is contained around micro-experiences. This could be a customer opening a mobile app for purchasing a car and customizing the model, the interior, the colors, the wheels and the accessories. 'The new session testing capabilities allow our customers to define what the beginning and the end of an experience is ' which is nested several layers deep based on every interaction the brand has with you,' added Allen. Customers can apply these session definitions retroactively to the data that they have been collecting for years. It is essentially a new way for Adobe's customers to filter their data within the settings of the virtual report suite . While other vendors process these sessions based on inactivity time-out parameters that are hard-coded on the mobile app client side, Adobe passes all behavioral data to the server, and applies session definitions non-destructively ' therefore giving brands complete control and flexibility to shift session definitions in real-time.
