Customer analytics at a retail bank look simple compared to the statistical analysis at an auto finance company. While a bank is just focused on money, Toyota Finance wants to move metal ' sell cars and trucks ' in the words of Chelsey Kate Meise, the manager of credit risk analytics for Southeast Toyota Finance. Active on Facebook Active on LinkedIn Active on Twitter +8820 views in the last 24 hours +104328 views in the last 24 hours +32764 views in the last 24 hours She develops models to examine individual's credit risk, but that's only part of what the company's analytics team does. They look at origination, the loan portfolio, losses, marketing, remarketing (selling cars that come off lease), securitization, insurance and even how customers click through the company's web site to see where they have problems. (It's a lot less expensive to solve their problems online than through a call center.) It's a challenging environment. As Bloomberg recently reported, more auto loans are going bad, interest rates are rising and financial institutions are becoming more selective in their lending for cars. The combination could mean 175,000 fewer sales this year, according to the National Automobile Dealers Association. Meise and her team would prefer that those cuts don't come from Toyota's numbers. 'We want to get as many contracts as we can while mitigating risk.' Using SAS tools for data analysis, the analytics department takes its skills to different departments within the company. 'People think they are doing things the best way they can be done because they have been doing it that way for a lifetime.' Data can show that isn't always the case. Meise said the group had a big win in re-marketing ' selling cars that have come off leases. 'We were able to show that rather than sending them to the closest auction, they could get better prices by moving cars to Florida for sale in the winter,' she said. With advanced degrees in math and an ease with statistical analysis that mere mortals can only regard with a mix of fear and awe, the analytical team members have to be careful to talk about their conclusions in plain English rather than bombarding other departments with equation-laden PowerPoints.
