An estimated 2.5 quintillion bytes of data are now produced every day.¹ The pace at which data is gathered and stored has grown so fast that the best estimates say 90% of the data in the world today has been created in the past two years. But much of this data lies dormant: only 0.5% of it has ever been analysed,² which means that big data analytics retain huge potential to deliver a wide range of benefits to specific industries and society at large. By leveraging the burgeoning infrastructure of the cloud, big data analytics can deliver big benefits to business and society alike. Comprising networks of data centres that use the internet to supply services from email and social networks to data storage and analysis,³ the cloud is increasingly accessible. Amazon Web Services, for example, has cut its prices 55 times since 2006.4 Thanks to cloud-based computing technology, organizations can now hire massive number-crunching capacity to analyse data whenever they need it, putting ‘big data analytics as a service’ among the fastest-growing cloud-based services.5 As the Internet of Things grows exponentially,6 cloud platforms will be essential in connecting devices and hosting related applications and data. Among respondents to a 2016 survey by Right Scale,7 private cloud adoption rose from 63% in 2015 to 77%. Major players from a range of industries – Bosch, Ericsson, Cisco, Intel and Amazon among them – are entering this growing space and vying to develop its most complete proposition.8 The benefits to industry of cloud-based big data analytics include: The cloud has some wider applications beyond big data analytics that can: The cloud and big data analytics are already delivering positive societal benefits – sometimes in unexpected ways. A vivid example occurred in 2009, when Google had some success in identifying in almost real time where the H1N1 flu outbreak in the United States had spread by using a complex algorithm that looked at correlations between Google searches made by people when a flu outbreak had occurred in their district in previous years.¹4 They can help with some of the biggest issues facing society today, including rising healthcare costs, crime and environmental conservation. Often, these benefits will be the straightforward result of industry initiatives that have a commensurate societal benefit, e.g. improved asset utilization reducing costs as well as CO2 emissions. Elsewhere, these benefits will need innovative private or public bodies to find ways to use data to address societal problems. As the threat of cybercrime rises and the importance of the cloud grows, the importance of safeguarding it increases. For providers, cybersecurity will be crucial to maintaining customer trust that sensitive and valuable data – kept on servers the customers cannot access themselves – is stored correctly, securely and privately. It will be crucial, too, for policy-makers charged with ensuring public safety. Sometimes, government may also need to step in to ensure potential benefits are not left behind as ‘trapped value’, as our final example illustrates. From our DTI research, we have identified several technologies (3D printing, artificial intelligence, autonomous vehicles, big data analytics and the cloud, the Internet of Things and connected devices, and robots and drones) that are having major impacts across the 13 industries analysed to date. This article is one of a series looking at how each of these technologies is transforming business and wider society.