Augmented reality, virtual reality, natural language question answering, machine learning, autonomous vehicles – artificial intelligence powers most of the innovations that dominate today’s conversations about the industries of tomorrow. A subfield of computer science, artificial intelligence (AI) develops computers that can do things traditionally done by people. Its solutions can sense or perceive the world and collect data; understand the information collection; and act independently – all underpinned by the ability to learn and adapt over time. As those innovations become capable of making significant productivity impacts, business is starting to take note. Accenture has found that the number of AI start-ups in the United States has increased 20 times over the past four years.¹ Jeff Dean, a senior fellow at Google, said in 2015 that he believed the pace of AI’s advancement was “actually speeding up”.² Narrative Science has reported that 62% of enterprises will be using AI by 2018.³ In the longer term, Accenture’s own research suggests AI could double annual economic growth rates in 2035, primarily by increasing labour productivity by 40%.4 AI’s potential to boost economic growth Source: Accenture and Frontier Economics As of 2015, the transport and automotive sector held the greatest share of an AI market that Markets and Markets predicts will grow to $5.05 billion by 2020.5 In that period, AI is set to grow fastest in healthcare, where it can make treatments more efficient, and improve diagnosis, patient care and drug discovery. Retail, professional services, and oil and gas are among other important sectors. Automotive and Logistics Around the world, road traffic accidents kill 1.25 million people a year, injure 20 million to 50 million, cost $518 billion and are predicted to be the fifth leading cause of death by 2030. Crash-avoidance technology in assisted-driving vehicles is already lowering accident rates. When AI-driven autonomous cars reach critical mass, those rates are likely to plummet. The insurance aspects of this transformation are not fully clear. What is clear, however, is that a liability shift will take place. Instead of driver behaviour, coverage will be placed on a car’s manufacturer, the software designer, device maker, map producer, the company that made the sensors in the highway or the vehicle, the operator, the passenger or the vehicle’s owner. Retail Already using it behind the scenes for supply-chain cost optimization, retailers are set to deploy AI on the customer-facing front line, where its deeper understanding of consumer behaviour can increase revenues. In physical retail stores, AI-enabled digital assistants will seamlessly and automatically find, order and deliver the ideal option to customers, and thus help satisfy the growing consumer expectation of instant gratification. Healthcare The volume of data produced by healthcare organizations has increased tremendously. Driving this increase has been developments such as the digitization of clinical information through the implementation of electronic medical records (EMRs), the generation of significant amounts of real-time data by billions of connected devices,¹° and lower-cost access to genomic information – not to mention the wealth of information captured on the internet. This information is feeding next-generation analytics technologies such as big data, cognitive computing and machine learning to, for example, improve the delivery of cancer treatments, personalize medical interventions, predict chronic diseases and drive behavioural change. Professional Services There is an unprecedented opportunity to harness the power of artificial intelligence to augment humans’ abilities to ‘do’, ‘think’, ‘learn’ and ‘feel’. By automating routine tasks, AI frees humans to focus on solving higher-order problems. In this way, digital innovations are improving workplace productivity (expected to rise by 22% by 2020)¹² and reducing the labour needed to complete a job (by 4% a year to 2019 in consulting)¹³. Accenture’s work with the World Economic Forum on the Digital Transformation Initiative has uncovered a variety of possible societal impacts stemming from the adoption of AI by different industries. Integrating predictive intelligence technologies into the design of smart cities promises to improve public safety.¹5 Singapore has already deployed sensors and cameras to monitor public spaces, but its Smart Nation programme has also raised concerns about Big Brother-style mass surveillance. In healthcare, AI is helping reduce the time it takes to bring new drugs to market. The impact of AI on bringing new drugs to market Source: ‘Turning artificial intelligence into business value. Today.’ Accenture¹6 There are wider, cross-industry questions to be answered too:¹7 AI has the potential to drive significant productivity increases that improve the quality of lives around the world, but its development and use is not without risk. As such, it must be implemented responsibly. From our DTI research, we have identified several technologies (3D printing, artificial intelligence, autonomous vehicles, big data analytics and the cloud, the Internet of Things and connected devices, and robots and drones) that are having major impacts across the 13 industries analysed to date. This article is one of a series looking at how each of these technologies is transforming business and wider society.